Television

File:Early portable tv.jpg Old portable television|thumb 
A  television  (also  TV ,  telly  or  tube ) is a  machine  with a  screen . Televisions receive  broadcast   Signal (electrical engineering) signals  and turn them into  picture s and  sound . The word "television" comes from the words  tele  ( Greek language Greek  for  far away ) and  vision  ( sight ).

Sometimes a television can look like a  box . Older TVs had a large  cathode ray tube  in a large wooden frame and sat on the floor like  furniture .  Newer TVs are much lighter and flatter.

A TV can show pictures from many  television network s.   Computer s and  mobile device s also can be used for watching  television program s.

At first, all televisions used an  antenna  (or aerial). This would pick up  television programme s from  broadcasting  stations. A TV station could be many miles or kilometers away, and still be received. TVs can also show movies from  VCD  and  DVD  players or  VCR s.  Cable TV  and  Satellite television  can provide more programs at once than broadcast can.  Video game console s connect to most modern TVs. Some  computer s can also use a TV as a  computer monitor .

All TVs have screens where the picture is viewed.  Before the 1950s these were usually " Monochrome black and white ", which made everything look grey, but all modern TVs show colors.  Most 20th century screens also had rounded corners.  That is because television screens were  cathode ray tube s.  These are like heavy glass jars with one side bulging out to form the screen.  

Today  flat panel display s are the usual kind.  These are usually flat rectangles with straight edges.  This long rectangle looks more like the shape of a  movie theatre  screen.  This is called  widescreen .  If a widescreen set was 30 cm tall, it would be 53 cm wide.  For this to work best, TV shows also need to be made in widescreen.  Widescreen sets can still be any size, but they have the same widescreen shape.

The early 21st century is also when  digital television  transmission became more common than  analog television .

 Criticism 
Many claim that watching TV adds unsocial behaviour especially when children are watching TV, while others claim that watching TV for short periods of time will not affect people. ref http://www.hrc.govt.nz/news-and-media/news/too-much-tv-linked-bad-behaviour  Research from New-Zealand ref 

 Related pages 
   Broadcasting 
   Television network 
   Media studies 

 References 
 commonscat 
 Reflist 

 Category:Television  