Taxonomy

Image:Scientific classification.svg right|100px|The hierarchy of scientific classification 

 Taxonomy  is a branch of  science . It is about the  law s and  principle s of classifying things. ref Oxford English dictionary ref  From one type of taxonomy, many classifications might be produced.

The best-known kind of taxonomy is used for the  Biological classification classification  of lifeforms (living and extinct). Each organism has a scientific name. This name is part of the  biological classification  of that  species . The name is the same all over the world, so that when scientists from different places talk or write about the living thing, they can understand each other. In addition, a species has a position in the  Tree of life (biology) tree of life . Thus the  crow  is  Corvus corone , a member of the  Corvidae   Family (biology) family , and they are  passerine   bird s. That is well agreed, but the classification of other groups is not agreed at present, and often several classifications are being discussed.

Living things are classified into three  Domain (biology) domains :  bacteria ,  archaea  and  eukaryotes . The highest rank in a domain is the  Kingdom (biology) kingdom . Each kingdom has many smaller groups in it, called  Phylum phyla . ref See  List of animal phyla ref  Each phylum has more smaller groups in it, called  Class (biology) classes . This pattern looks like branches on a tree with smaller branches growing from them. Each species is put into a group because of what it does, how and what it eats, special body parts, and so on. At the end of the pattern, the groups ( Genus genera ) are very small. Then each species in the genus is given its own name. 

When someone writes about a living thing and its formal scientific name, they write the genus and species name. This is known as  binomial nomenclature , because it uses two names for each  organism . The first is the  genus  name, and the second is the  species  in that genus. The scientific name of the  domestic cat  is  Felis catus . Sometimes it is enough to write  F. catus . 

These are the major groups ( taxon rank s) used in taxonomy:

 Kingdom (biology) Kingdom  -->  Phylum  -->  Class (biology) Class  -->  Order (biology) Order  -->  Family (biology) Family  -->  Genus  -->  Species 

Some  mnemonic s (sayings to help a person remember something):
  King Phillip Came Over From Greater Spain,

When people started naming species,  Latin language Latin  was a language widely used in  Europe . All species names are still written in Latin. This has some advantages. Since Latin is no longer spoken, it is unchanging, and is owned by no-one. It gets over the problem of every language having its own names for animals and plants.

Scientists used to write the official description of each new species in Latin. On 1 January 2012, the  International Botanical Congress  changed to allow English (as well as Latin) for describing new plant species. ref cite web title Veni, vidi, vici - and now history first Adrian last Higgins work Washington Post date 19 January 2012 page A1 url http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P2-30538042.html ref  The  International Code of Zoological Nomenclature  recommends choosing a language that is widely used, and that is used in the places where the species lives.

  Cladism  
An important modern approach to taxonomy is  Clade cladism . This approach is based on the branching (tree-like) course of  evolution . Like traditional  Linnaeus Linnaean  classification, it uses  traits  to decide on the branches of the classification. It insists on groups being  monophyletic . This has the effect that  birds  are not a class but a sub-group of  dinosaurs . It also means the ranking system described above would be abolished. 

So cladism has different principles of taxonomy, and produces a different kind of taxonomy. Decisions, where possible, are supported by  DNA   sequence analysis . Present-day  biological classification  is a mixture of the old Linnaean and the modern cladistic principles of taxonomy. In parts, it is changing rapidly. The classifications presented in Wikipedia at present are often a compromise between the two systems. The details are regularly discussed.

  Turmoil in taxonomy  
Today, there are many changes in the classification of living things. This turmoil in taxonomy has led to many alternative  Biological classification classifications . It is caused partly from the move from  Linnaeus Linnaean  to  Cladistics cladistic  principles, ref name Ridley Ridley, Mark 1986.  Evolution and classification . Longman, London. ISBN 0-582-44497-7 ref  and partly by the use of  DNA sequence  data in taxonomy. An example is: the way  derived  groups like birds should not be classified at the same level as the group they evolved from. Yet birds have traditionally been a  Class (biology) class  under the Linnaean system. 

The turmoil sometimes results in differences between related pages. Pages may rely on different references and different authors' opinions as to the present best arrangement.

The following source is good on the differences between cladistic and taxonomic classification systems:
 Grant, Verne 2003.  Incongruence between cladistic and taxonomic systems.  American Journal of Botany .  90  (9) 1263-1270.  http://www.amjbot.org/content/90/9/1263.full 

  Related pages  
 Molecular clock 
 Molecular evolution 
 Sequence analysis 
 Biological classification 
 Military taxonomy 

  References  
 Reflist 

  Other websites  
   http://en.citizendium.org/wiki/Taxonomy Taxonomy  Citizendium

 Category:Taxonomy  