Climate

Image:ClimateMap World.png alt=Map of world dividing climate zones, largely influenced by latitude. The zones, going from the equator upward (and downward) are Tropical, Dry, Moderate, Continental and Polar. There are subzones within these zones.|thumb|right|370px| center Worldwide Climate Classifications center 
 Climate  means the usual condition of the  temperature ,  humidity ,  atmospheric pressure ,  wind ,  rainfall , and other  Meteorology meteorological   Weather elements  in an area of the  Earth 's surface for a long time. Climate is different from weather. Weather is the condition of these elements right now, for shorter periods of time that are up to two weeks.

The  latitude , ground, and height can change the climate of a location. It is also important to note if oceans or other large bodies of water are nearby. Climates are most commonly classified by  temperature  and  precipitation . The most commonly used classification was the  Koppen climate classification , first made by Wladimir Koppen. The Thornthwaite system, ref C. W. Thornthwaite, "An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate",  Geographical Review , 38:55-94, 1948 ref  which was used from 1948, not only uses temperature and precipitation information, but  evapotranspiration  too. This makes it useful for studying how many different  Biodiversity kinds of animal species  there are, and about the things that could happen when climates change. The Bergeron and  Spatial Synoptic Classification system s focus more on where the  air mass es which help make climates come from.

 Climate change Climates can change  after a long time. Recently, the world may be becoming warmer, as is discussed in  global warming .

The climate of a place is given names such as  temperate ,  arid ,  cold ,  dry ,  tundra ,  tropical ,  equator ial ,  Mediterranean ,  savanna , etc. 

  Subarctic regions have a  subarctic climate  (also called  boreal climate ), characterized by long, usually very cold winters, and short summers.

   Temperate  climates have four  season s. Some of the countries which have a temperate climate are: Turkey, and most of the  Europe an countries.

   Arid  climates are hot climates, like  desert s. They just have one or two seasons such as:  Saudi Arabia  and most of the African countries.

   Tropical climate s have warm temperature and only two seasons; wet and dry. An example of a place with a tropical climate is the  Amazon Rainforest  in  Brazil .

  The  Mediterranean climate  is usually hot and dry in summer, and is cool and wet in winter. An example of a country with a Mediterranean climate is  Spain .

  The  savanna s' climate is often tropical wet and dry.
See also:  Koppen climate classification Koppen's climate classification scheme 

  References  
 Reflist 

 Category:Climate