Gold

File:Or Venezuela.jpg thumb|A gold nugget, a piece of gold found in nature 
 File:Two 20kr gold coins.jpg thumb|right|Two golden 20 kr coins: the coin to the left is  Sweden Swedish  and the right one is  Denmark Danish 
 File:Golden crown Armento Staatliche Antikensammlungen 01.jpg thumb|right|Ancient golden crown, the  Kritonios Crown , 370-360 BC. From a grave in  Armento ,  Campania 

 about the metal the color Gold (color) 

 Gold  is a soft, heavy, shiny  metal . It is a  chemical element . Its  chemical symbol  is  Au . Its  atomic number  is 79. It has been used for many thousands of years by people all over the world, for  jewelry ,  decoration , and as  money . Gold is important because it is  scarcity rare , but also easier to use than other rare metals. It is also used to repair and replace  teeth  and in electronic equipment such as  computer s. The  color  of this metal is also called  Gold (colour) gold .

 Mining  methods for gold are similar to other metals.  Gold is so valued that the discovery of a new place to mine has sometimes caused a  gold rush .

Often, gold is found as a native element. This means it is not part of an ore, and does not need extracting.

Most of the gold on Earth is deep inside the  Earth's core  because it is dense. Nearly all discovered gold was deposited on the surface by  meteorite s.

  Chemical properties  
In  chemistry , gold is  chemical element  79, a  transition metal  in Group 11. It has an  atomic weight  of 199.96 a.m.u. Its  symbol  is  Au , from the  Latin  word for gold,  aurum . It is a "noble metal" meaning it has low  Reactivity (chemistry) chemical reactivity .

Gold is very soft. It is  Malleability malleable , meaning a  goldsmith  can hammer it into thin metal sheets. It is also  Ductility ductile , which means it can be pulled into  wire . When it is used in money or in jewelry, it is often  alloy ed with  silver  or some other metal to make it harder.

Most metals are gray in color. Gold is yellow because of the way its  electron s behave. ref cite web url http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/physics/Relativity/SR/gold_color.html title Relativity in Chemistry publisher Math.ucr.edu accessdate 2009-04-05 ref ref Cite journal journal   Chemical Physics volume   311 pages   151-161 title   Understanding gold chemistry through relativity doi   10.1016/j.chemphys.2004.09.023 first   Hubert last   Schmidbaur coauthors   Cronje, Stephanie; Djordjevic, Bratislav; Schuster, Oliver year   2005 issue   1-2 bibcode   2005CP....311..151S  ref  The only other metal in common use that has a non-gray color is  copper .
 File:Nancy Johnson.jpg thumb| Nancy Johnson  and her  Olympic Games Olympic  gold medal 

  Language and culture  
Gold can mean that something or someone is very good or has done very well. A gold  medal  is often the given to the first place winner in a race or other sports. Something that is in some way good may be given  gold status .

  References  
 Reflist 

  Other websites  
 commonscat Gold 
 wiktionary 
   http://education.jlab.org/itselemental/ele079.html Atomic Properties 
   http://www.goldinstitute.org/ Gold Institute 
   http://en.citizendium.org/wiki/Gold Gold  -Citizendium
 Periodic Table 
 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Gold