Inch

The  inch  is a unit of  length  in the  Imperial unit Imperial system  and the  United States customary units United States customary system . The  abbreviation  for inches is  in  or  " . There are 12 inches in a  Foot (unit of length) foot . One inch is equal to 2.54 centimetre s.

The word "inch" came from  Middle English   unche , which came from  Old English   ynce , from  Latin   uncia  meaning "a twelfth part".

  History  

The inch was originally defined as 3  Barleycorn (unit) barleycorns . The inch was finally standardised in the International Yard and Pound Treaty in 1959 between the  United States , the  United Kingdom ,  Union of South Africa South Africa ,  Australia ,  New Zealand  and  Canada . The international yard was made equal to 0.9144  metre s. From this, subdivisions and multiples of the yard were specifically defined.

  Usage  

In the  United States , people use inches more than they use  millimetre s or  centimetre s. In the rest of the world,  International System of Units international units  are almost always used. The inch is not used by scientists.

In the United Kingdom,  Traffic sign road signs  that show how high a vehicle can be in order to pass through a  tunnel  are required to be in feet and inches.  Theme park s and  Drive-through drive thru  signs usually show it in metres. People regularly measure their  height  in feet and inches. Official medical records, however, are required to record people's height in  Metric system metric  measurements only.

In Canada, a mix of centimetres and inches are used in height. Older generations, especially, use Imperial units. A lot of exposure to  Americanisation Americanized  phrases leads to younger generations often having a good understanding of both the Imperial and metric systems.

In the United States, height is always in feet and inches. Science is the only field to use metric measurements.

Other  Commonwealth of Nations Commonwealth  countries, including  Republic of Ireland Ireland , Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and  Jamaica  use inches to varying degrees. From every day use to exclusively the older community.

  Length  
 class wikitable  International    Thou (unit) Thou    Inch    Foot (unit) Foot     Yard (unit of length) Yard     Centimetre 
  Inch   1000   1    frac 1 12     frac 1 36    2.54
 

 Category:Units of length 
 Category:Imperial units