1969

Year nav 1969 

 1969  ( MCMLXIX ) was a  common year starting on Wednesday  of the  Gregorian calendar . It was the last year of the  1960s .

  Events  
   January 12  -  Led Zeppelin 's first album is released.
   January 20  -  Richard Nixon  becomes  President of the United States , after  Lyndon Johnson .
   February 3  -  Yasser Arafat  becomes  Palestinian Liberation Organization  leader at the  Palestinian National Congress .
   April 9  - Around 300 students take over  Harvard University , because they do not like the  Vietnam War  being fought.
   May 10  - Battle of Hamburger Hill in  Vietnam .
   May 20  - National Guard  helicopter s spray skin-stinging powder on Vietnam War protesters in  California .
   May 31  -  John Lennon  and  Yoko Ono  record "Give Peace a Chance" at their " Bed-In " in  Montreal .
   June 8  - Nixon announces that 25,000  United States US   military troops  will start to leave Vietnam before September.
   July 8  - As promised, some US troops begin to leave  Vietnam .
   July 20  - The  Apollo 11  mission makes  Neil Armstrong  and  Buzz Aldrin  are the first people on  the Moon .
   August 9  - The  Charles Manson Manson Family  murders the actress  Sharon Tate  and members of her family.
   August 15  - The  Woodstock   music  festival starts in Upstate  New York .
   August 17  - Hurricane Camille hits  Mississippi , killing 248 people.
   August 31  - Boxer  Rocky Marciano  dies in a plane crash on the day before his 46th birthday.
   September 1  - King  Idris I  of  Libya  is removed from power in a coup.
   September 7  -  Monty Python 's Flying Circus  airs for the first time on  United Kingdom British   television .
   October 15  - Hundreds of thousands of people across the US protest against the Vietnam War by not going to work.
   October 21  -  Willy Brandt  becomes the first  SPD -Chancellor of  Germany 
   November 9  - A group of  American Indian s takes over  Alcatraz  Island and holds it for 19 months.
   November 13  - Up to 500,000 anti-war protesters march and protest in  Washington DC .
   December 1  - The United States holds the first " draft   lottery ", to pick who is going to be sent to fight in Vietnam.

  Births  

   January 2  -  Christy Turlington ,  United States American   model (person) model 
   January 3  -  Michael Schumacher , German  Formula one  driver
   January 5  -  Marilyn Manson , American  singer 
   January 14  -  Dave Grohl , American  musician 
   January 16  -  Roy Jones, Jr. , American professional boxer
   January 18  -  Dave Bautista , American  Professional wrestling professional wrestler 
   February 1  -  Brian Krause , American  actor 
   February 11  -  Jennifer Aniston , American actress
   March 6  -  Greg Scott ,  England English   television presenter 
   April 25  -  Renee Zellweger , American actress
   May 14  -  Cate Blanchett , Australian actress
   May 25  -  Stacy London , American  fashion  consultant
   June 14  -  Steffi Graf , German tennis player
   June 15  -  Oliver Kahn , German football player
   June 27  -  Colleen Fitzpatrick , American singer and actress
   July 20  -  Josh Holloway , American actor
   July 24  -  Jennifer Lopez , American singer and actress
   July 27  -  Paul Levesque Triple H , American professional wrestler
   August 6  -  Elliott Smith , American singer and musician (d.  2003 )
   August 18  -  Edward Norton , American actor
   August 19  -  Matthew Perry , American actor
   August 28  -  Jack Black , American actor,  comedian , and musician
   October 24  -  Adela Noriega , Mexican television actress
   November 10  -  Jens Lehmann , German football player
   December 4  -  Jay-Z , American  Hip hop rapper 
   December 9  -  Bixente Lizarazu ,  France French   football (soccer) footballer 
   December 19  -  Kristy Swanson , American actress
   December 28  -  Linus Torvalds ,  Finland Finnish   computer science computer scientist 
   Buckethead , American musician

  Deaths  
   January 1  -  Barton MacLane , American actor (b.  1902 )
   January 31  -  Meher Baba ,  India n  mysticism mystic  (b.  1894 )
   February 26  -  Levi Eshkol , 3rd  Prime Minister  of  Israel  (b.  1895 )
   March 28  -  Dwight D. Eisenhower , 34th President of the  United States  (b.  1890 )
   June 2  -  Leo Gorcey , American actor (b.  1917 )
   June 22  -  Judy Garland , American actress and singer (b.  1922 )
   August 9  -  Sharon Tate , American actress (b.  1943 )
   August 31  -  Rocky Marciano , American  boxing boxer  (b.  1923 )
   September 2  -  Ho Chi Minh , President of  North Vietnam  (b.  1890 )
   October 21  -  Jack Kerouac , American  writer  and  poet  (b.  1922 )

  Nobel Prizes  
   Nobel Prize  in  Nobel Prize in Physics Physics  -  Murray Gell-Mann , American physicist (for his work on the theory of  Particle physics elementary particles )
   Nobel Prize in Chemistry Chemistry  -  Derek H R Barton ,  Odd Hassel 
   Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Medicine  -  Max Delbruck ,  Alfred D Hershey ,  Salvador Luria Salvador E Luria 
   Nobel Prize in Literature Literature  -  Samuel Beckett , Irish writer
   Nobel Peace Prize Peace  -  International Labour Organization 
   Nobel Prize in Economics Economics  -  Ragnar Frisch ,  Jan Tinbergen 

  Movies released  
   Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid 
   Midnight Cowboy 
   Shart 

  Hit songs  
  "Aquarius"/"Let The Sunshine In" -  Fifth Dimension 
  "The Ballad of  John Lennon John  and  Yoko Ono Yoko " -  The Beatles 
  "But You Know I Love You" -  Kenny Rogers  and The First Edition
  "The Boxer" -  Simon and Garfunkel 
  "In The Ghetto" -  Elvis Presley 
  "Cloud Nine" -  The Temptations 
  "Come Together" -  The Beatles 
  "Get Back" -  The Beatles 
  "Good Times Bad Times" -  Led Zeppelin 
  "Honky Tonk Women" -  Rolling Stones 
  "I'd Wait A Million Years" -  The Grass Roots 
  "Listen to the Band" -  The Monkees 
  "Pinball Wizard" -  The Who 
  "Proud Mary" -  Creedence Clearwater Revival 
  "Raindrops Keep Fallin' On My Head" -  B.J. Thomas 
  "Something" -  The Beatles 
  "Suspicious Minds" -  Elvis Presley 
  "Touch Me" -  The Doors 
  "Whole Lotta Love" -  Led Zeppelin 
  New Books  
   Ada or Ardor: A Family Chronicle  -  Vladimir Nabokov 
   The Andromeda Strain  -  Michael Crichton 
   The Edible Woman  -  Margaret Atwood 
   The Godfather  -  Mario Puzo 
   The Green Man  -  Kingsley Amis 

 Commonscat 1969 

 Category:1969  