Physics

Physics  is a branch of  science . It studies  matter , and all  forces  and their effects. Modern physics connects ideas about the four laws of  symmetry  and conservation of  energy ,  momentum ,  charge , and  parity . The word   physics  comes from the  Ancient Greek language Greek  word e phusis, meaning "nature". ref name feynmanleightonsands1963-atomic At the start of  The Feynman Lectures on Physics ,  Richard Feynman  offers the  Atomic theory atomic hypothesis  as the single most important scientific concept, that  all things are made up of atoms - little particles that move around in perpetual motion, attracting each other when they are a little distance apart, but repelling upon being squeezed into one another ..."  ref  Physics can also be defined as "that department of knowledge which relates to the order of nature, or, in other words, to the regular succession of events". ref James Clerk Maxwell Maxwell J.C.  1878.  Matter and motion . Van Nostrand, p9. ISBN 0-486-66895-9 ref 

One of the most fundamental  Discipline (study) scientific disciplines , the main goal of physics is to understand how the  universe  behaves.

Physics is a very old discipline because  astronomy , a part of physics, is the oldest natural science. In the past it was a part of natural philosophy with other fields of science, such as  chemistry  and  biology , but during the  scientific revolution , these fields became separate, and physics became a distinct field of  knowledge .

Physics is very important in the development of new  Technology technologies , such as  fixed-wing aircraft airplanes ,  television televisions ,  computer computers  and  nuclear weapon nuclear weapons .  Mechanics , a branch of physics, helped develop the mathematical field of  calculus .

  History  
  Ancient astronomy  
Astronomy is the oldest  natural science . The  Sumerians ,  Ancient Egyptians , and  Indus Valley Civilization  all understood how the  Astronomical object things in the sky  moved since before 3000  BC . ref Aaboe A. 1991.  Mesopotamian mathematics, astronomy, and astrology . The Cambridge Ancient History. Volume III (2nd ed). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-22717-9 ref  This is because they worshiped the objects in the sky as gods. Their understanding wasn't scientific, but their observations influenced later astronomy.

A lot of astronomy comes from  Mesopotamia ,  Babylonia ,  Ancient Egypt , and  Ancient Greece . Astronomers from Egypt built monuments that showed how things in the sky moved, and most names for constellations that can be seen from the  Northern hemisphere  came from Greek astronomers.

  Natural philosophy  
Natural philosophy started in Greece around 650 BC when  Pre-socratic philosophers some philosophers  rejected  superstition  and decided  Naturalism (philosophy) things had to happen for a reason .  Leucippus  and his student  Democritus  suggested the idea of the  atom  around this period.

  Physics in the medieval Islamic world  
 Science in medieval Islam Islamic scholars  continued to study  Aristotelian physics  during the  Islamic Golden Age . They also developed an early form of the  scientific method .

Scientists like  Ibn Sahl ,  Al-Kindi ,  Alhazen Ibn al-Haytham ,  Kamal al-Din al-Farisi Al-Farisi  and  Avicenna  worked a lot on  optics  and  vision . In  Book of Optics The Book of Optics , Ibn al-Haytham rejects previous Greek ideas and comes up with a new theory about vision. He studied how  light  enters the  eye  and then developed the  camera obscura . From this book, European scientists later built eyeglasses, magnifying glasses, telescopes, and cameras.

  Classical physics  
Physics became a separate field of study after the  scientific revolution . ref Dijksterhuis E.J. 1986.  The mechanization of the world picture: Pythagoras to Newton . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-08403-9 ref 

 Galileo Galilei Galileo's  experiments helped to create classical physics. And although he did not invent the telescope, he noticed that the stars and planets were not perfect. He also investigated gravity.

 Isaac Newton  used Galileo's ideas to put together his  Newton's laws of motion three laws of motion . ref Ben-Chaim M. 2004.  Experimental philosophy and the birth of empirical science: Boyle, Locke and Newton . Aldershot: Ashgate. ISBN 0-7546-4091-4 ref  He also developed calculus to help understand problems in mechanics, such as  orbit how things moved around the Sun .

More energy was needed during the  Industrial Revolution  and more discoveries were made during this time in many fields of science. The laws of classical physics are good enough to study things that go much slower than the  speed of light , and that are not very small. When very fast or very small things are studied, these laws do not work anymore, and because of this, modern physics was developed.

  Modern physics  
As research progressed, scientists found things that classical mechanics did not explain.

Classical mechanics predicted that the  speed of light  varied, but experiments showed the speed of light stayed the same. This was predicted by  Albert Einstein 's  theory of  special relativity . Einstein predicted that the speed of  electromagnetic radiation  through empty space would always be the same. His view of  space-time  replaced the ancient idea that space and time were quite separate things. 

 Max Planck  came up with  quantum mechanics  to explain why  Photoelectric effect metal releases electrons when you shine a light at it , and why  Black-body radiation matter emits radiation . Quantum mechanics applies for very small things like the electrons, protons, and neutrons that make up an  atom . People like  Werner Heisenberg ,  Erwin Schrodinger , and  Paul Dirac  continued to work on quantum mechanics and eventually we got the  Standard Model . ref Einstein, Albert and Infeld, Leopold 1938.  The evolution of physics: from early concept to relativity and quanta . Cambridge University Press. A non-mathematical account. ref ref Feynman R.P; Leighton R.B. & Sands M. 1963.  The Feynman Lectures on Physics . 1. ISBN 0-201-02116-1 ref 

  Definition  

Physics is the study of  energy  and  matter  in  Space (physics) space  and  time  and how they are related to each other. Physicists assume the existence of  mass ,  length ,  time  and  electric current  and then define (give the meaning of) all other  physical quantity physical quantities  in terms of these  units of measurement basic units . Mass, length, time, and electric current are never defined but the  standard  units used to measure them are always defined. In the  International System of Units  (abbreviated SI from the French  S ysteme  I nternational), the  kilogram  is the basic unit of mass, the  metre  is the basic unit of length, the  second  is the basic unit of time, and the  ampere  is the basic unit of electric current.

In addition to these four units, there are three other ones: the  Mole (unit) mole , which is the unit of the quantity of matter, the  candela  which measures the luminous intensity (the power of lighting) and the  kelvin , the unit of  temperature .

Physics studies how things move, and the  Force (physics) forces  that make them move. For example,  velocity  and  acceleration  are used by physics to show how things move. Also,  physicists  study the  Force (physics) forces  of  gravity ,  electricity ,  magnetism  and the forces that hold things together. 

Physics studies very large things, and very small things. For instance, physicists can study  star s,  planet s and  galaxy galaxies  but could also study small pieces of matter, such as  atom s and  electron s.They may also study  sound ,  light  and other  wave s. As well as that, they could examine  energy ,  heat  and  radioactivity , and even  Space (physics) space  and  time . 
Physics not only helps people understand how objects move, but how they change form, how they make  noise , how  heat hot  or  cold  they will be, and what they are made of at the  atom smallest level .

  Physics and mathematics 
Physics is a  quantity quantitative  science because it is based on  measure measuring  with  number s. Mathematics is used in physics to make  model s that try to  prediction guess  what will happen in nature. The guesses are compared to the way the real  world  works. These guesses are made by theoretical physicists, and they are compared to the real world by experimental physicists. Physicists are always working to make their models of the world better.

  Advanced knowledge  
  General description  
Physics is the  science  of  matter  and how  matter  interacts.  Matter  is any physical material in the  universe . Everything is made of  matter . Physics is used to describe the physical universe around us, and to predict how it will behave. 
Physics is the  science  concerned with the discovery and characterization of the universal laws which govern  matter ,  movement  and  Force (physics) forces , and  Space (physics) space  and  time , and other features of the natural world.

  Breadth and goals of physics  
The sweep of physics is broad, from the smallest components of matter and the forces that hold it together, to  galaxy galaxies  and even larger things. There are only four  force s that appear to operate over this whole range. However, even these four  force s ( gravity ,  electromagnetism , the  weak force  associated with radioactivity, and the  strong force  which holds  protons  and  neutrons  in an  atom  together) are believed to be different parts of a single force. 

Physics is mainly focused on the goal of making ever simpler, more general, and more accurate rules that define the character and behavior of matter and space itself. 
One of the major goals of physics is making theories that apply to everything in the universe. In other words, physics can be viewed as the study of those universal laws which define, at the most basic level possible, the behavior of the physical  universe .

  Physics uses the scientific method  
Physics uses the  scientific method . That is, data from experiments and observations are  :wikt:collect collected . Theories which attempt to explain these data are produced. Physics uses these theories to not only describe physical phenomena, but to model physical systems and predict how these physical systems will behave. Physicists then compare these predictions to observations or experimental evidence to show whether the theory is right or wrong.

The theories that are well supported by data and are especially simple and general are sometimes called  scientific law s. Of course, all theories, including those known as laws, can be replaced by more accurate and more general laws, when a disagreement with data is found. ref An equation (e.g., f = m a) is called a "law" when there are clear empirical results that substantiate it. ref 

  Physics is quantitative  
Physics is more quantitative than most other sciences. That is, many of the observations in physics may be represented in the form of numerical measurements. Most of the theories in physics use mathematics to express their principles. Most of the predictions from these theories are numerical. This is because of the areas which physics has addressed work better with quantitative approaches than other areas. Sciences also tend to become more quantitative with time as they become more highly developed, and physics is one of the oldest sciences.

  Fields of physics  
 Classical physics  normally includes the fields of  mechanics ,  optics ,  electricity ,  magnetism ,  acoustics  and  thermodynamics . Modern physics is a term normally used to cover fields which rely on quantum theory, including  quantum mechanics , atomic physics,  nuclear physics ,  particle physics  and  condensed matter physics , as well as the more modern fields of  general relativity general  and  special relativity , but these last two are often considered fields of classical physics as they do not rely on quantum theory. Although this difference can be found in older writings, it is of little new interest as quantum effects are now understood to be of importance even in fields that before were called classical.

  Approaches in physics  
There are many approaches to studying physics, and many different kinds of activities in physics. There are two main types of activities in physics; the collection of data and the development of theories. 

The data in some subfields of physics is amenable to experiment. For example, condensed matter physics and nuclear physics benefit from the ability to perform experiments. Experimental physics focuses mainly on an  Empiricism empirical  approach. Sometimes experiments are done to explore nature, and in other cases experiments are performed to produce data to compare with the predictions of theories. 

Some other fields in physics like astrophysics and geophysics are mostly observational sciences because most of their data has to be collected passively instead of through experimentation. However, observational programs in these fields use many of the same tools and technology that are used in the experimental subfields of physics. 
 
Theoretical physics often uses quantitative approaches to develop the theories that attempt to explain the data. In this way, theoretical physicists often use tools from  mathematics . Theoretical physics often can involve creating quantitative predictions of physical theories, and comparing these predictions quantitatively with data. Theoretical physics sometimes creates models of physical systems before data is available to test and support these models.

These two main activities in physics, data collection, theory production and testing, use many different skills. This has led to a lot of specialization in physics, and the introduction, development and use of tools from other fields. For example, theoretical physicists use mathematics and numerical analysis and statistics and probability and computer software in their work. Experimental physicists develop instruments and techniques for collecting data, using engineering and computer technology and many other fields of technology. Often the tools from these other areas are not quite appropriate for the needs of physics, and need to be changed or more advanced versions have to be made.

It is frequent for new physics to be discovered if experimental physicists do an experiment that current theories cannot explain, or for theoretical physicists to generate theories which can then be put to the test by experimental physicists.

Experimental physics,  engineering  and technology are related. Experiments often need specialized tools such as  particle accelerator particle accelerators ,  laser lasers , and important industrial applications such as  transistor transistors  and  magnetic resonance imaging  have come from applied research.

  Physicists  
 Prominent theoretical physicists 
Famous  theoretical physicists  include
 div col cols 3 
 Galileo Galilei  (1564-1642)
 Christiaan Huygens  (1629-1695)
 Isaac Newton  (1643-1727)
 Leonhard Euler  (1707-1783)
 Joseph Louis Lagrange  (1736-1813)
 Pierre-Simon Laplace  (1749-1827)
 Joseph Fourier  (1768-1830)
 Nicolas Leonard Sadi Carnot  (1796-1842)
 William Rowan Hamilton  (1805-1865)
 Rudolf Clausius  (1822-1888)
 James Clerk Maxwell  (1831-1879)
 J. Willard Gibbs  (1839-1903)
 Ludwig Boltzmann  (1844-1906)
 Hendrik A. Lorentz  (1853-1928)
 Henri Poincare  (1854-1912)
 Nikola Tesla  (1856-1943)
 Max Planck  (1858-1947)
 Albert Einstein  (1879-1955)
 Milutin Milankovic  (1879-1958)
 Emmy Noether  (1882-1935)
 Max Born  (1882-1970)
 Niels Bohr  (1885-1962)
 Erwin Schrodinger  (1887-1961)
 Louis de Broglie  (1892-1987)
 Satyendra Nath Bose  (1894-1974)
 Wolfgang Pauli  (1900-1958)
 Enrico Fermi  (1901-1954)
 Werner Heisenberg  (1901-1976)
 Paul Dirac  (1902-1984)
 Eugene Wigner  (1902-1995)
 Robert Oppenheimer  (1904-1967)
 Sin-Itiro Tomonaga  (1906-1979)
 Hideki Yukawa  (1907-1981)
 John Bardeen  (1908-1991)
 Lev Landau  (1908-1967)
 Anatoly Vlasov  (1908-1975)
 Nikolay Bogolyubov  (1909-1992)
 Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar  (1910-1995)
 John Archibald Wheeler  (1911-2008)
 Richard Feynman  (1918-1988)
 Julian Schwinger  (1918-1994)
 Feza Gursey  (1921-1992)
 Chen Ning Yang  (1922- )
 Freeman Dyson  (1923- )
 Gunnar Kallen  (1926-1968)
 Abdus Salam  (1926-1996)
 Murray Gell-Mann  (1929- )
 Riazuddin (physicist) Riazuddin  (1930- )
 Roger Penrose  (1931- )
 George Sudarshan  (1931- )
 Sheldon Glashow  (1932- )
 Tom W. B. Kibble  (1932- )
 Steven Weinberg  (1933- )
 Gerald Guralnik  (1936-)
 Sidney Coleman  (1937-2007)
 C. R. Hagen  (1937-)
 Ratko Janev  (1939- )
 Leonard Susskind  (1940- )
 Michael Berry (physicist) Michael Berry  (1941- )
 Bertrand Halperin  (1941-)
 Stephen Hawking  (1942- )
 Alexander Markovich Polyakov Alexander Polyakov  (1945-)
 Gerardus 't Hooft  (1946- )
 Jacob Bekenstein  (1947-)
 Robert Laughlin  (1950-)
 div col end 

 Related pages 
   Astronomy 
   Energy 
   Matter 
   Time 

  References  
 reflist 

  Other websites  
 commonscat 
   http://physics.webplasma.com/physicstoc.html Physics For Beginners 
   http://www.physicisttv.com/ PhysicistTv .

 Category:Physics  