History of Australia

People have lived in  Australia  for about 40,000-60,000 years. The first people who arrived in what is now Australia were the Aboriginal people and  Torres Strait Islanders . ref name dfat.gov.au http://www.dfat.gov.au/aib/history.html Australia in Brief: Ancient heritage, modern society - Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade ref  The aboriginal people  came by  boat  from the  island s of what is now  History of Indonesia Indonesia . They lived in all parts of Australia. Their lives were simple, they had very few needs. They lived by  hunting ,  fishing  and gathering.

Aborigines invented tools like the  boomerang  and spear, but did not farm. Tradition was very important in their lives. Their religion is called the  Dreaming (spirituality) Dreaming , which has lots of stories about the creation of the world by spirits.  Aboriginal art  started at least 30,000 years ago and there are lots of Dreaming stories painted on walls and cut in rocks all around Australia.  Australian Aboriginal music Aboriginal music  has songs about the Dreamtime, sometimes with special instruments like the  didgeridoo .

In 1606 the first European,  Netherlands Dutch  explorer  Willem Janszoon  (1571-1639), visited the west Luis Vaez de Torres de Torres  sailed through the water between Australia and  Papua New Guinea  later that year. fact date November 2014  
Only after Dirk Hartog chanced upon the west coast in 1616 did other European vessels visit and map the coast. After sixty more ships visited the coast, fact date November 2014  enough was known for a map to be published in 1811.  The land was dry because of not much rain; some was a  desert . The explorers thought no  crop s could be grown and so it would be difficult for people to live there. They decided there would be no  economic  reasons to stay. 

In 1642, Dutchman  Abel Tasman , working for the  Dutch East Indies Company  reached  Tasmania , which he called  Antony van Diemenslandt . He then called the continent he charted the north coast of on his second visit in 1644  New Holland . In 1688, the privateer  William Dampier  became the first Englishman to reach Australia. But in 1770 a British sailor, Captain  James Cook , found the fertile east coast of Australia. He called it  New South Wales , and claimed it for Britain. ref name dfat.gov.au 
Englishman  Matthew Flinders  published his map of the coast in 1814, calling it  Australia  for the first time, a name later formally adopted by the authorities.

 Colonial Australia 

 File:Adelaide North Tce 1839.jpg thumb|Adelaide in 1839.  South Australia  was founded as a free-colony, without convicts. 
 File:Victoria Parliament House Melbourne.jpg thumb|The Parliament of Victoria, in  Melbourne . 

The British decided to use the land visited by  Captain Cook  as a prison colony. Britain needed a place to send its  convict s (people who had been sent to  jail  for  theft  and other  crime s) because its  gaol s were full and it had just lost its American colonies in the  American War of Independence . In 1788 the British  First Fleet  of 11 ships, carrying about 1500 people arrived at  Sydney .  Arthur Phillip  led them as the first  Governor of New South Wales . About 160 000 convicts were brought to Australia from 1788 until 1868. Free immigrants began arriving in the 1790s. ref name dfat.gov.au 

For the first few years they did not have much  food , and life was very hard. But soon they began to  farm , and more people came. Sydney grew, and new towns were started.  Wool  brought good money. By 1822, many towns had been set up and people from the towns often visited Sydney for additional economic resources.

Soon people from  Sydney  found other parts of Australia.  George Bass  and  Matthew Flinders  sailed south to  Tasmania  and a colony was started at  Hobart  in 1803.  Hamilton Hume  and  William Hovell  went south from Sydney by land. They found the  Murray River , and good land in  Victoria (Australia) Victoria .  Thomas Mitchell  went inland, and found more rivers. In 1826, the first  British military  outpost was set up at  King George Sound  in  Western Australia . The  Swan River Colony  was started in 1829, with townsites at  Fremantle, Western Australia Fremantle  and  Perth, Western Australia Perth . In 1836, a free-settler colony was started in  South Australia , where no convicts were ever sent.  Queensland  became a separate colony in 1859. As the towns and farms spread across Australia, the Aboriginal people were pushed off their land. Some were  kill ed, and many  die d from  disease illness  and hunger. Soon, Australia's Aborigines were outnumbered by Europeans, and many were made to live on reserves.

The goldrushes of New South Wales and Victoria started in 1851 leading to large numbers of people arriving to search for gold. The population grew across south east Australia and made great wealth and industry. By 1853 the goldrushes had made some poor people very rich.

Convict transportation ended in the 1840s and 1850s and more changes came. The people in Australia wanted to run their own country, and self-govern. The first governments in the colonies were run by Governors chosen by London. Soon the settlers wanted local government and more democracy. The  New South Wales Legislative Council , was created in 1825 to advise the  Governor of New South Wales , but it was not chosen by voters.  William Wentworth  established the  Australian Patriotic Association  (Australia's first political party) in 1835 to demand  Parliamentary democracy democratic government  for New South Wales. In 1840, the  Adelaide City Council  and the  Sydney City Council  were started and some people could vote for them (but only men with a certain amount of money). Then, Australia's first  parliament ary elections were held for the New South Wales Legislative Council in 1843, again with some limits on who could vote.  The Australian Colonies Government Act  [1850] allowed constitutions for New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania. ref http://aec.gov.au/Elections/Australian_Electoral_History/righttovote.htm The Right to Vote in Australia - Australian Electoral Commission ref  In 1850 elections for legislative councils were also held in the colonies of Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania. ref name autogenerated1 http://aec.gov.au/Elections/Australian_Electoral_History/reform.htm Australia's major electoral developments Timeline: 1788 - 1899 - Australian Electoral Commission ref 

In 1855, limited self government was granted by London to New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania. A new  secret ballot  was introduced in Victoria, Tasmania and South Australia in 1856, allowing people to vote in private. This system was copied around the world. In 1855, the  right to vote  was given to all men over 21 in  South Australia . The other colonies soon followed. ref name autogenerated1  Women were given the vote in the  Parliament of South Australia  in 1895 and they became the first women in the world allowed to stand in elections. In 1897,  Catherine Helen Spence  became the first female political candidate. ref name aec.gov.au cite web url http://www.aec.gov.au/Voting/indigenous_vote/indigenous.htm   title AEC.gov.au  publisher AEC.gov.au  date 25 Oct. 2007  accessdate 27 Jun. 2010 ref ref http://foundingdocs.gov.au/item.asp?dID=8 Documenting Democracy   WebCite url http://www.webcitation.org/60vtMmmE7 date  2011-08-14 ref 

Australians had started parliamentary democracies all across the continent. But voices were getting louder for all of them to come together as one country with a national parliament.

Australia and New Zealand fought to get Australia.

 References 
 Reflist 

  Other websites  
 Commons category History of Australia 
   http://www.atmitchell.com/journeys/history/ History of the Australian nation - State Library of NSW 
  The  http://gutenberg.net.au/aust-history.html Australian History  page at  http://gutenberg.net.au Project Gutenberg of Australia 
   http://www.bushpoetry.org.au/ Bush Poetry a source of Australian History 
   http://www.brueckenbach.net/blog/index.php?/archives/61-Versuch-zur-Voelkerverstaendigung-6-Know-what-Im-sayin.html An Aborigine on his understanding of tradition 

 Category:History of Australia  