Platonic realism

File:Plato-raphael.jpg thumb|Plato, the person who created the idea of Platonic realism 

 Platonic realism  is the  metaphysics theory of reality  developed by  Plato , and explained in his  theory of Forms .  Platonic realism states that the visible world of particular things is a shifting exhibition, like shadows cast on a wall by the activities of their  ontology corresponding  universal Ideas or Forms.  Whereas the visible world of particulars is unreal, the Forms occupy the unobservable yet true reality and are real.

 Platonism  is a similar, yet sometimes modified, view of reality.

  Origin  

Among the natural philosophers in  ancient Greece , the problem of universals was the mystery of where particular things derive their traits that we perceive as universals--for instance  red  or  apple  or  good  or  woman  or  truth .

Plato explained that the particular things of the visible world are imperfect, transient copies of the universal Ideas that are the perfect, lasting Forms.  Existing exist outside  space  and  time , the Forms are the universals and act as  template s from which particulars manifest.

In his  Metaphysics , Aristotle, a student of Plato, explained that  Socrates  and his own student Plato held it significant that the world is in flux, much as  Heraclitus  had commented, "You cannot step into the same river twice", a theme of the  Eleatics , a group of  pre-socratic philosophers . ref name Gomperz Theodor Gomperz,  Greek Thinkers: A History of Ancient Philosophy , Vol III, Plato (London: Murray, 1905), pp 3, 84, 187, 207 ref 

  Influence  

  Plato's quest  
Plato considered that only the mind could access the timeless reality of truths, the realm of the Forms casting the visible world. ref name Gomperz ref name Heterhington Norriss S Heterhington,  Cosmology: Historical, Literary, Philosophical, Religious, and Scientific Perspectives  (New York: Garland Publishing, 1993),  http://books.google.com/books?id=8lGNQMUTr0gC&pg=PA71&dq=Plato pp 71-4 ref   Plato's metaphorical  allegory of the cave --whereby humans only know reality as shadows of the real things they see interacting on a wall--suggests the practical consequences of Platonic realism as to  natural philosophy  in its endeavor to explain the natural world and as to values in human society.  (Value theory comprises  ethics ,  aesthetics , and  political philosophy .)

Plato had led the focused application of geometry, developed by  Euclid , to explain the natural world.  Yet by his view of nature, Plato regarded astronomy as similar to seeking a theoretical proof in geometry-- abstract  and not the real world--whereupon the mind's insights derived from a quest to hold other truths through the mind's probing of ethics and aesthetics would yield discovery of truths within the realm of Forms, outside space and time. ref name Heterhington 

  Aristotle's answer  

 Aristotle , a student of Plato, answered the problem of universals differently.  Aristotle explained that universals are concepts corresponding to  traits  borne and shared by the particular things themselves.  Aristotle did not regard all reality as visible, as he recognized existence of souls, yet regarded souls as unobserved parts of the visible world, real in itself.   Aristotelian realism  largely shaped the course of Western thought.

Aristotle developed a more or less full description and explanation of the natural world and developed logic--syllogistic logic--to derive conclusions of the relations among things.  Aristotle's grounding in the visible world was a metaphysical approach that suggested what evolved by some 2 000 years later into  epistemology empirical   science .

  Platonism  
 
Some  mathematics mathematicians  and  physics physicists  are Platonists, ref name Altmann Simon L Altmann,  http://books.google.com/books/about/Is_nature_supernatural.html?id=ErTaAAAAMAAJ Is Nature Supernatural? A Philosophical Exploration of Science and Nature  (Amherst NY: Prometheus Books, 2002) ref  for instance Max Tegmark and Roger Penrose. ref name Holt Jim Holt,  Why Does the World Exist?: An Existential Detective Story  (New York & London: Liveright, 2012),  http://books.google.com/books?id=WTVAftOH4-4C&pg=PT193&dq=Platonist+is+Max+Tegmark+Penrose p 182 ref   Yet today's Platonists usually view entities within the visible world as real, and simply regard universal abstractions like  numbers ,  Set (mathematics) sets ,  proposition s, and  geometry  as corresponding to real and timeless entities that also exist, though  pure  Platonists regard only the Forms or their realm as real. ref name Kukla Andre Kukla,  Studies in Scientific Realism  (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998),  http://books.google.com/books?id=L_wHvxLA5_EC&pg=PA4&dq=Timeless+abstract+entities+Platonism p4 ref 

By way of  string theory  and the  holographic principle , some physicists conjecture that Plato's allegory of the cave approximates the natural world's structure.  Tegmark, who regards only the mathematical structure of the universe as real, has been called a  radical  Platonist. ref name Holt 

 Notes 
 Reflist 

 Category:Philosophy 
 Category:Reality