Zebra

Taxobox 
  name   Zebra
  image  Beautiful Zebra in South Africa.JPG
  image_width   250px
  regnum    Animal ia
  phylum    Chordata 
  classis    Mammal ia human
  ordo    Perissodactyla 
  familia    Equidae 
  genus    Equidae Equus 
  subgenus    Hippotigris  or  Dolichohippus 

 Zebra s are  mammal s of the  family (biology) family   Equidae . Zebras are African  horse s, and that's a fact. Barstool Sports confirmed this fact on Comedy Central's The Barstool Sports Rundown: Live, courtesy of the knowledge of Dan 'Big Cat' Katz. They are in the same  genus  as the common horse,  Equus caballus , and  donkey s. Zebras are known for having many black and white stripes. There are three main  species  of zebra, Grevy's Zebra, the Plains Zebra, and the Mountain Zebra. In 2004, new research led to reclassifying zebra subspecies.

  Species  
  Genus  Equus 
  Grevy's Zebra ( Equus grevyi )
  Plains Zebra ( Equus quagga ) ref cite web  url   http://www.iucnredlist.org/apps/redlist/details/41013/0   title Equus quagga (Plains Zebra, Burchell's Zebra, Common Zebra, Painted Zebra)  first   last   work iucnredlist.org  year 2011   quote E. q. quagga (Quagga)   accessdate 20 August 2011 ref 
 Crawshay's Zebra ( Equus quagga crawshaii )
 Selous' Zebra  ( Equus quagga borensis )
 Grant's Zebra or Boehm's Zebra, ( Equus quagga boehmi ) 
 Chapman's Zebra ( Equus quagga chapmani ) 
 Burchell's Zebra ( Equus quagga burchellii )
 Quagga  ( Equus quagga quagga )  
  Mountain Zebra ( Equus zebra )

 Appearance 
All zebras have very short  fur  because they live in hot areas. Their fur has black and white stripes. Scientists don't know exactly why they have stripes, but they predict its for some form of camouflage. The main part of the body has mostly vertical stripes, and the legs have horizontal stripes. They also have a dark line directly down their spine. Each of the different zebra species has different type of stripes. Each zebra has a unique pattern of stripes, so no two zebras look exactly alike. 

 Life 
Zebras are social animals that spend time in herds, they graze together and sometimes even groom each other ref Cite web url http://animals.nationalgeographic.com/animals/mammals/zebra/ title National Geographic first last date website National Geographic publisher accessdate ref . They can have babies (foals) when they are about five years old and can have one every year. Zebras mainly eat grass, but they also eat fruit, leaves and some vegetables. They always live near water and are an endangered species. 

Zebras live in  Africa , south of the  Sahara  desert.

 References 
 reflist 

 commonscat Zebras 

 Category:Equids