Fecund universes

File:LeeSmolinAtHarvard.JPG thumb|Lee Smolin, creator of the Fecund universes theory 
 Fecund universes  is a  multiverse   theory  of  Lee Smolin .  It relies on  models of our universe  and  statistics  from  astrophysics  but is more correctly a theory of  cosmology .

In this theory, collapsing stars, or  black hole s, are always  creating  new universes with slightly different  laws of physics .  Because these laws are only slightly different, each is assumed to be like a  mutation  of the original universe, as if each universe was a kind of  single-celled organism .  It would  reproduce  by "splitting" in some sense.

This theory relies on many  models of our universe  to model these "mutated" alternative universes, the ones that Smolin supposes are generated or "spun off" by  black hole s. 

No  human  can ever be part of any of these "other" universes.  Observations from  astrophysics  can only say if the black holes exist or are common, and give some idea of how much the  laws of physics  can vary and still let the new universes produce new black holes.  

Smolin predicts that there would be many black holes in the universe humans can see, since they are likely in a very late born universe, by simple probability.  If there are many black holes, that is evidence for his theory, 

As this shows,  cosmology  has a very different  standard of evidence  and  burden of proof  than is required for  models of our universe  only, which humans (using mathematics) can observe and exchange  knowledge  on.

It is hard to separate science from  religion  on such questions.  It may be a simple matter of preference whether one wants to see one's universe as part of a system like  biology  or like  mechanics  -  clockwork .  Smolin's theory is important mostly because it challenges the  mechanistic paradigm .  

Even if it is wrong, it raises the idea that living beings might have to see their universe as also living to be able to understand or care about it at all.  Some compare Smolin's theory to  Gaia philosophy  which combines  biology ,  geology  and  ecology  to explain the  Earth , our planet, as a living thing.  If both are right, humans are on a living planet in a living universe.  This idea is very appealing - which does not mean it is really "right".  Some think both are a kind of  religion .

 Category:Cosmology