Berry

File:true.berries.jpg 300px|thumb|right|Four fruits that are true berries, shown larger than they are.  Clockwise  from right: br grape s,  persimmon ,  gooseberry red gooseberries ,  redcurrant red currants  (top) 
 File:Berries (USDA ARS).jpg 250px|thumb|right|Several types of common "berries". None is a berry by botanical definition: br The blueberry is a  false berry , blackberries are  aggregate fruit , and strawberries are  accessory fruit . 
The word  berry  is used for many different kinds of small  fruit s that have many  seeds  and can be used as food. Some examples are  strawberry ,  raspberry ,  blueberry  and  lingonberry .

When  botany botanists  talk about  berries , they mean a simple  fruit  produced from a single  gynoecium ovary . They sometimes call this  true berry , to distinguish it from  false berries . By that statement of how words are used,  grape s or  tomato es are true berries.

The berry is the most common type of soft fruit in which the entire ovary wall gets to the right stage of development of the  pericarp  which can be taken as food. The flowers of these plants have an upper ovary with one or more  carpel s. The seeds are inside the soft body of the ovary.

Berries are small, sweet, bright colored fruits. Due to this, they are able to bring more  animal s towards them and spread their  seed s.

Some fruits that are called  berries  in  English language English  are not  true berries  by the use of words above. These include strawberries,  blackberry blackberries ,  raspberry raspberries ,  cranberry cranberries , and  boysenberry boysenberries . Some true berries do not have  berry  in their name. These include  tomato es,  eggplant s,  guava s,  pomegranate s and  chile pepper chillies .  Pumpkin s,  cucumber s,  melon s,  orange (fruit) oranges  and  lemon s are also berries that have slightly different structure and may be called by different names ( pepo  for pumpkins, cucumbers, and melons, or  hesperidium  for oranges and lemons).

 Fruits 

 biology-stub 

 Category:Berries   
 Category:Basic English 850 words