Health

Health  is "a state of complete  wikt:physical physical ,  Mental illness mental , and  social  well-being and not merely the absence of  disease " according to the  World Health Organization  (WHO).  ref name WHO definition http://www.who.int/about/definition/en/print.html  Preamble to the Constitution of the World Health Organization as adopted by the International Health Conference, New York, 19-22 June, 1946; signed on 22 July 1947 by the representatives of 61 States (Official Records of the World Health Organization, no. 2, p. 100); and entered into force on 7 April 1948. ref ref name WHO constitution http://www.who.int/governance/eb/who_constitution_en.pdf  Constitution of the World Health Organization-  Basic Documents , Forty-fifth edition, Supplement, October 2006. ref   Physical  is about the body.  Mental  is about how people think and feel.  Social  talks about how people live with other people. It is about  family , work, school, and friends.

 File:Poster of reluctant GI getting Flu shot.jpg thumb|Poster: Reluctant GI getting a  Flu  shot. 

  Aspects of health  

 Physical health 
Physical fitness refers to good  human body body  health. It is dependent on genetic determinators and also on social, economic and ecological factors. That means, one's genes are partly responsible for one's physical health, but also other circumstances: where you live, how clean or polluted your water and the air around you is and also how good your social and medical system is. It is also the result of regular  exercise , proper  diet  and  nutrition , and proper rest for physical  wikt:recovery recovery . A person who is physically fit will be able to walk or run without getting breathless and they will be able to carry out the activities of everyday living and not need help. How much each person can do will depend on their age and whether they are a man or woman. A physically fit person usually has a normal weight for their height. The relation between their height and weight is called their  Body Mass Index . A taller person can be heavier and still be fit. If a person is too heavy or too thin for their height it may affect their health. ref  Centers For disease Control and Prevention   http://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/effects/index.html ref 

 Mental health 
Mental health refers to a person's  emotion al and  psychology psychological  well-being. "A state of emotional and psychological well-being in which an individual is able to use his or her thinking and emotional (feeling) abilities,  wikt:function function  in  society , and meet the  wikt:ordinary ordinary  demands of everyday life."

One way to think about mental health is by looking at how well a person functions. Feeling  wikt:capable capable  and  wikt:efficient efficient ; being able to handle normal levels of  Stress (medicine) stress , have good friends and family, and lead an  wikt:independent independent  life; and being able to "bounce back," or  wikt:recover recover  from hardships, are all signs of mental health.

 Public health 
 Main Public health 
 Public health  refers to trying to stop a  disease  that is unhealthy to the community, and does not help in long life or promote your health. This is fixed by organized efforts and choices of society, public and private clubs, communities and individuals.

It is about the health of many people, or everybody, rather than one person. Public health stops instead of encouraging a disease through  Disease surveillance surveillance  of cases. To prevent being sick, it is good to act according to some simple advice:   Hand washing , regular check-ups,   vaccination  programmes, clean water and using  condom s. When  infectious disease s break out, washing hands for about 30 seconds may be especially important. Sometimes it is necessary to avoid masses of people or wear a surgical mask to protect yourself and to stop the spreading of the disease. Teaching people how to live healthily and educate them, especially about sex and child-birth, is also very important.

 Related pages 
   Medicine 
   Healthy lifestyle 
   Physical fitness Fitness 

 References 
 commonscat 
 reflist Category:Health   
 Category:Basic English 850 words