June

monththisyear 6 
 June  is the sixth  month  of the  year , coming between  May  and  July . It has 30  day s. June is named for the  Roman mythology Roman goddess   Juno (mythology) Juno , the wife of  Jupiter (mythology) Jupiter . She is  deity goddess  of  marriage . Because of this, getting married in June was thought to be lucky.  

June never starts on the same day of the week as another month, but always ends on the same day of the week as  March .  

  The Month  
June comes between  May  and  July  and is the sixth month of the year in the  Gregorian calendar . It is one of four months to have 30 days.

No other month in any year,  Common year common  or  leap year , starts on the same day of the week as June.  May  is the other of two months to have this feature. June ends on the same day of the week as  March  every year, as  March 31  and  June 30  are exactly 13  Week weeks  (91  Day days ) apart.

In common years, June starts on the same day of the week as  September  and  December , and ends on the same day of the week as  September , both of the preceding year; in leap years, June starts on the same day of the week as  April  and  July , and ends on the same day of the week as  April  and  December , both of the preceding year.

June always starts on the same day of the week as  February  of the following year: if that year is a common year, June starts the same day of the week as  March  and  November , and ends on the same day of the week as  August  and  November , both of the following year; if that year is a leap year, June starts on the same day of the week as  August  and ends on the same day of the week as  May , both of the following year.

The month of June has a  solstice , and in this month the  Tropic of Cancer  in the  Northern hemisphere Northern Hemisphere  is turned towards the  Sun , meaning that  June 20  or  June 21  is the Northern  Summer Solstice  and the Southern  Winter Solstice . This means that this date would have the most daylight of any day in the  Northern hemisphere Northern   Southern Hemisphere Hemisphere , and the least in the  Northern Hemisphere Southern Hemisphere . There are 24 hours of daylight at the  North Pole  and 24 hours of darkness at the  South Pole . In each  hemisphere , June is the seasonal equivalent of  December  in the other.

 Events in June 
  The  solstice  occurs around  June 21 , but it may occur on either the  June 20 20th  or the  June 22 22nd . It is the  summer  solstice in the northern hemisphere and the  winter  solstice in the southern hemisphere.
   Midsummer  is celebrated in  Sweden  on the third  Friday  in June.
   Father's Day  is celebrated in the  United States  on the third  Sunday  in June.
   Gay pride  celebrations happen in many countries, in honour of the  Stonewall riots .
   World   Environment  Day is celebrated on  June 5 .
  World  Ocean  Day is celebrated on  June 8 .

  Trivia  
  June is one of two months that never starts on the same day of the week as another month of the same year, the other being  May .
  The months of June and  July  both start with the "Ju" letter combination in the  English language , and in some  Language languages  have only one letter's difference between their names.
  June's  flower  is the  Rose .
  Its  birthstone  is the  pearl . The meaning for the birthstone pearl is health.
  The Zodiac signs for June are  Gemini (astrology) Gemini  (May 21 - June 20) and  Cancer (astrology) Cancer  (June 21 - July 21).
 months 
 stub