Scurvy

Unreferenced date January 2016 

 Scurvy  is a  disease  (sickness). It is caused by not eating enough  vitamin C . But scurvy can be prevented. It has many  symptom s. People who have scurvy get spots on their skin, especially on their legs. Their teeth may loosen and/or fall out. They may  bleeding bleed  from the mouth, nose, and gums ( mucus membrane s). A person with scurvy will look pale and feel sad (see  Depression (illness) depression ). They will not be able to move easily, because their  joint s hurt.

Scurvy can be easily cured. Oranges and other  fruit s can restore vitamins. In the past,  sailor s more commonly got scurvy. Fresh fruit could not be kept for long.The main cause of scurvy is lack of fresh fruits and  vegetable s. It is uncommon today.

 Signs of scurvy 

 At first, a person with scurvy may: 
 Not want to eat (loss of  appetite )
 Feel sad (slight depression)
 Lose weight or not get heavier even though they eat a lot
 Have loose feces ( diarrhea )
 Breathe fast ( tachypnea )
 Be hot (have a high body temperature or  fever )

 A bit later a person with scurvy may: 
 Feel angry (irritability)
 Have pains in the legs (and tenderness)
 Find it hard to move (pseudo  paralysis )
 Have  inflammation swelling  of the arms and legs
 Bleed from the mouth, nose and gums

 Why people get scurvy 

 Not eating enough food that has vitamin C 
 Going on a long trip, often at sea, where there is no fresh food
 Not having enough food ( famine )
 Breaking down the vitamin C by over-cooking (like boiling fruit juice) ref Cite web url http://umm.edu/health/medical/altmed/supplement/vitamin-c-ascorbic-acid title Vitamin C (Ascorbic acid) first last date 7/16/2013 website Medical Reference Guide publisher University of Maryland Medical Center accessdate 4/10/2016 ref 

 Treatment of scurvy 

 Eating vitamin C pills or giving it by needle (injection, also known as a shot). The injection almost always cures scurvy in babies.
 Drinking orange juice is another treatment that works in babies. Before vitamin C was discovered this was the only treatment.

When a person gets help for scurvy, they usually get better very quickly. Babies start eating again after one or two days of help. The  symptom s get better within seven days.

 Getting vitamin C from food 

Eating vitamin C  wikt: prevent prevents  scurvy. How much vitamin C a person needs changes with his or her age and is different for  pregnancy pregnant  and  breast lactating  women. The following is the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council's advice on how much vitamin C to eat every day:

  Infants (babies): 30-40 mg 
  Children and adults: 45-60 mg 
  Pregnant women: 70 mg 
  Mothers breast feeding: 90-95 mg

Foods with a lot of vitamin C include the following:

   Citrus   Fruit fruits  (for example: oranges, limes)
   Berries  
   Cantaloupe  
   Broccoli  
   Cauliflower  
   Cabbage  
   Spinach  
   Potato es 
   Tomato es
   Strawberry Strawberries 

  References  
 reflist 2 

 Category:Diseases