Stream

File:Sprout Creek.JPG right|thumb|A stream in  New York  called the Sprout Creek 
A  stream  is a natural flow of  water  moving across  country  between  bank s. It is smaller than a  river .

The primary meaning of  stream  is a body of water, confined within a  Stream bed bed  and banks, and having a detectable  current (water) current .  Synonyms or related words include  river , creek,  tributary , run, branch, brook, bourne, wash, and  fork . Navigable streams are sometimes called  waterway s, though the term may apply to any size of permanent and natural water feature except  ocean s.

In the  United States , an intermittent stream is one that only flows for part of the year and is marked on  topographic map topographic maps  with a line of blue dashes and dots.  In  desert  areas of the  American Southwest , this also includes  wash (creek) wash es, which only flow after  thunderstorm s or other significant  rain s.  A blue-line stream is one which flows for most or all of the year and is marked on topographic maps with a solid blue line. In  Australia , an intermittent stream is usually called a creek, and marked on topographic maps with a solid blue line.

Generally, streams that form only during and immediately after precipitation are termed ephemeral streams.

Streams in geographic terms are awarded order designations.  A stream of the first order is a blue-line stream which does not have any other blue-line stream feeding into it.  A stream of the second order is one which is formed by the joining of two or more blue-line streams.  A third-order stream is one below the confluence of two or more second-order streams; a fourth-order stream is formed by the confluence of at least two third-order streams, and so forth.

Typically, streams are said to have a particular profile, beginning with steep  gradient s, no  flood plain , and little shifting of  channel s, eventually evolving into streams with low gradients, wide flood plains, and extensive  meander s.  The initial stage is sometimes termed a "young" stream, and the later state a "mature" or "old" stream.  However, a stream may meander for some distance before falling into a "young" stream condition.

The gradient of a stream is a critical factor in determining its character, and is entirely determined by its  base level  of  erosion .  The base level of erosion is the point at which the stream either enters the ocean, a lake or pond, or enters a stretch in which it has a much lower gradient, and may be specifically applied to any particular stretch of a stream.  In geologic terms, the stream will erode down through its bed to achieve the base level of erosion throughout its course.  If this base level is low, then the stream will rapidly cut through underlying strata and have a steep gradient, and if the base level is relatively high, then the stream will form a flood plain and meanders.

When a stream flows over an especially resistant stratum and forms a  waterfall  or  cascade , or the same results because for some reason the base level of erosion suddenly drops, perhaps as a result of a fault, the resulting sudden change in stream elevation is called a nickpoint.  The stream, of course, expends  kinetic energy  in "trying" to eliminate the nickpoint.

Meanders are looping changes of direction of a stream.  These may be somewhat sine-wave in form.  Typically, over time, the meanders don't disappear but gradually  migration migrate  downstream.  However, if some resistant material slows or stops the downstream movement of a meander, a stream may erode through the neck between two legs of a meander to become temporarily straighter, leaving behind an arc-shaped body of water termed an  oxbow lake  or bayou.  A  flood  may also result in a meander being cut through in this way.

The point of origin of a stream is often called the headwaters or source.  The entire basin drained by the stream is termed the  watershed .  Every watershed is made up of smaller watersheds, while most watersheds are parts of larger watersheds.  For instance, the  Continental Divide  in  North America  divides the  Atlantic Ocean  watershed from the  Pacific Ocean  watershed, but the Atlantic Ocean watershed may be first divided into the Atlantic Ocean drainage and the  Gulf of Mexico  drainage.  This delineation within the  United States  is termed the  Eastern Divide .  The Gulf of Mexico watershed may be divided into  Mississippi River  basin and a number of smaller watersheds, such as the  Tombigbee River  watershed.

The Mississippi River watershed includes the  Ohio River  watershed, which in turn includes the  Kentucky River  watershed, and so forth.

The point at which a stream empties into an ocean or other large body of relatively level water is termed the mouth.  There may often be an  estuary  or  delta  at the mouth.

Some streams flow underground through unconsolidated sediments or through caves.  Especially with caves, a stream may flow aboveground for part of its course, and underground for part of its course.  When a stream emerges from an underground course, it is termed a  spring .

The study of streams and waterways in general is known as surface  hydrology  and is important in  environmental geography  or  environmental geology .

 Other uses for "stream" 
 A contemporary usage is streaming  internet radio  and  broadband   web television .  See also  streaming media . 
 High speed streams of  air  in the upper atmosphere are called  jet stream s. 
 Ocean currents are sometimes referred to as streams, such as the  Gulf Stream . 
 Standard streams  is a computing term. 

  Other pages  
 waterfall 
 river 
 waterway 
 lake 
 marsh 
 swamp 
 ocean 
 spring 

 geo-stub 
 category:water 

 kk:Ruchei (Kyrdzhali oblysy)