Soul

for the music genre Soul music 
Many  philosophy philosophies  and  religion s say that a  soul  is the part of a  life living   human being  which is  supernatural  and lives after  human death death . It cannot be discovered by science, because it cannot be tested in any controlled way. Many different opinions exist as to what happens to personal  experience  after death. Most  Atheism atheists  say that there is no such thing as a soul, and that the body is the only part of a person.

  Popular culture  
In popular culture, soul usually means deep feeling and commitment. It is in this sense that the word appears in the term  soul music . However that music was also influenced by  gospel music  which was religious.

One popular idea about souls that is easy to express, is that a person  is  a soul, and  has  a body. ref Miller, Walter M. Jr. (1960).  A Canticle for Leibowitz. ref  The soul is the "I" in "I exist" that feels and lives life. What people call the  mind  could be  part  of the soul: one soul started this article, other souls have edited it, and another soul is reading it. This view, however, implies that the  human body  is a possession, and seems to devalue bodies that do not have souls as defined or understood by the speaker (some people say that  animal s,  heretic s, and people of another  religion  do not have souls). Like most uses of the verb  to be , there is an ideology in these simple words.

Christianity teaches that all humans have an immortal soul. ref name mayled cite book title GCSE Religious Studies: Philosophy and Applied Ethics for OCR B: Revision Guide first Jon last Mayled publisher Hodder Education date 2010 page 17 isbn 978-1-444-11071-5 ref  This means that it is a part of them which does not die when their physical body dies, but lives on with them to  heaven  or to  hell . Christians believe that the soul is the 'breath of life' which God gave to Adam. ref name mayled 

In  Japan  the soul is believed to weigh 21 grams. This belief may have been influenced by the observations of  :en:Duncan MacDougall (doctor) Dr. McDougall  in the early 1900s. cn date June 2013   

  Characteristics  
One distinction often made is between soul, which is distinct from other souls, and  spirit  which may be combined with that of other beings. The idea of the  Holy Spirit  in  Christianity , for example, is a universal and shared spirit many souls are part of, and which is expressed on Earth in that faith by "the Church" meaning "the body of Christ" meaning "all bodies that follow Jesus." This could be more inclusive than the is/has view of souls and bodies.

  Reincarnation  
 Reincarnation  is a belief that says that after the body dies, the soul will be born again in another body.

  References  
 references 

 Category:Death customs 
 Category:Theology