Association football

For the  United States American  sport, see  American football . For other sports known as football, see  Football 
 File:CH-AL Geneva 2003-06-11.jpg thumb|300px| Switzerland  and  Albania  playing football 
 File:Football pitch metric.svg thumb|right|250px|A football field 


 Association football  is a  sport , played between two teams. There were various  attempts to codify the the rules of football in England in the mid-19th century. The present laws date back to 1863 where a ruleset was adopted by the newly formed  Football Association . 

In its country of origin,  United Kingdom , it is called  football . In other countries, such as the  United States  and  Canada , it is called  soccer . In  Australia ,  New Zealand ,  Republic of Ireland Ireland ,  South Africa , and  Japan , both words are often used. 

Each team has 11 players on the  field . One of these players is the  goalkeeper , and the other ten are known as "outfield players". The game is played by kicking a  ball  into the opponent's  wikt:goal goal . A match has 90  minute s of play, with a breakjjke of 15 minutes in the mjigge. The 90 minutes of play also includes extra time. The break in the middle is called  half-time .

  Competitions  
 Sports  
There are many competitions for football, for both football clubs and  country countries . Football clubs usually play other teams in their own country, with a few exceptions.  Cardiff City F.C.  and  Swansea City F.C  from  Wales  for example, play in the  England English  leagues and in the English  FA Cup .

Groups such as  UEFA  and  FIFA  organise international competitions between clubs and countries. Clubs play in competitions such as  UEFA Champions League  or  UEFA Europa League , and countries play for the  FIFA World Cup World Cup  or a continental trophy such as the  UEFA European Football Championship .

The  FIFA World Cup  takes place every four years between national teams, and is the world's most popular sporting event, even more popular than the  Olympic Games . ref http://www.initiativemedia.com/static/prDec2006.html World's most watched TV sports events: 2006 ref  In football, there are two main types  competitions. In a "league", all of the teams play the same number of games, but in a "cup", teams leave the competition when they lose, until the last two teams play each other to decide the winner.

  Who plays football  
Football is the world's most popular sport. It is played in more countries than any other game. In fact, FIFA (the Federation Internationale de Football Association) has more members than the  United Nations . It is played by both  male s and  female s.    

In Europe, the main competitions to compete to be the best in Europe are the Champions League for the top teams from the top leagues in each country in Europe. Then there is UEFA Europa League which is for the next best teams from each member of the UEFA.

The most successful club in the world, in terms of domestic league results, is  Rangers F.C.  from  Scotland , who have won more domestic league titles than any other team in the world. They have won the  Scottish Premier League country's league  51 times ref name Number of league wins cite news url http://www.rsssf.com/miscellaneous/kamprec.html#tnc publisher Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation title Total Number of Championships date 23 November 2006 ref  which is a world record. ref name 100 trophies cite news url http://www.rsssf.com/miscellaneous/rangers-100trophies.html publisher Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation title Glasgow Rangers - 100 Trophies date 21 October  2001 ref  Other successful clubs are  FC Barcelona  and  Real Madrid C.F. Real Madrid  from  Spain , or  Manchester United F.C. Manchester United   from  England . 

  Rules  
  Fundamental rules  
 Note: this is not a complete summary 
  The side which scores the most goals wins. If scores are equal, the result is a draw.
  The officials in a football game are a  referee  and two linesmen. 
  Goals are scored by getting the ball into the  opponents' goal, more than halfway across the line.
  Referees have access to goal-line cameras to decide close cases.
  The  offside rule  means that there have to be at least two defenders between the attacker and the defenders' goal when the attacker's teammate passes the ball to him/her. (This is not a complete summary: the rule is complex). Usually, one of the two defenders is the goalkeeper.
  Players may not use their hands or arms (handball), except the goalkeeper, who may use them within his own  penalty area  ( penalty areas  are in front of both goals).
  The ball is out of play if it crosses the field boundaries.
  If a player kicks the ball out of play at the side of the field, the other team gets to throw the ball back into play (a  throw in ).
  If a player kicks the ball out of play at their end of the field, the other team kicks the ball back into play from the corner (a  corner kick );
  If a player kicks the ball out of play at the other end of the field, the other team kicks the ball back into play from directly in front of the goal (a  goal kick ).
  Football is a game of two halves. Each half is 45 minutes.  The referee may add time to the end of each half when play is delayed due to injuries or substitutions.  There is an interval of ten minutes between halves.
  Each team is allowed up to three substitutes from the bench during the course of a game. No player substituted can return during the game.

  Behaviour rules  
  Players may not trip or push each other (a  foul ).
  Players may not hold each other or stop other players from getting to the ball ( obstruction ).
  When a player scores he is not allowed to jump into the crowd. If he does he will get a yellow card. The same applies to lifting their shirt in celebration.
  Players must not abuse referees in any way (verbally or physically).
  Players who commit bad fouls get shown a yellow card. Players who commit really bad fouls, or get shown two yellow cards in the same game, get shown a red card. Players who get shown a red card get sent off the field and cannot finish playing the game. In some competitions (like the Premier League in  England ) you miss the next game (suspended) if you get a red card, or pick up 5 yellow cards during the season.

  Related pages  

   List of national football teams 
   List of Argentine football teams 
   List of Austrian football teams 
   List of Brazilian football teams 
   List of Dutch football teams 
   List of English football teams 
   List of French football teams 
   List of German football teams 
   List of Indian football teams 
   List of Italian football teams 
   List of Japanese football teams 
   List of Portuguese football teams 
   List of Russian football teams 
   List of Scottish football teams 
   List of Spanish football teams 
   List of association football clubs in Sweden 
   List of United States soccer teams 
   List of Welsh football teams 

  References  
 commonscat 
 reflist 


 Association football positions 

 Category:Football (soccer)   
 Category:Summer Olympic sports