Constitution

File:Hammurabi.jpg thumbnail|200px|Detail from  Hammurabi 's  stele  shows him receiving the laws of  Babylon  from the seated  sun deity . 
 Other uses constitutions in general the US Constitution United States Constitution 

The  constitution  of a  country  (or a  state ) is a special type of  law   document  that tells how its  government  is supposed to work. It tells how the country's  leader s are to be chosen and how long they get to stay in  office , how new laws are made and old laws are to be changed or removed based on law, what kind of people are allowed to  vote  and what other  rights  they are guaranteed, and how the constitution can be changed.

Limits are put on the Government in how much power they have within the Constitution  (see  Rule of Law  ) . On the other hand, countries with repressive or corrupt governments frequently do not stick to their constitutions, or have bad constitutions without giving freedom to citizens and others. This can be known as  dictatorship  or simply "bending the rules". A Constitution is often a way of uniting within a  Federation .

The  United Kingdom UK's  constitution is not written in one single  wikt:document document  like many other countries' are. In fact, the UK's constitution is not completely written down at all. Some of it can be found in writing, starting with the  Magna Carta  of 1215 and the  Bill of Rights 1689 Bill of Rights Act 1689  and including more modern  Act of Parliament Acts of Parliament . Other parts of it are considered  common law  and are made up of the decisions of  judge s over many hundreds of years in a system called legal or  Judiciary judicial   Precedent precedence . Because of this, some people say that the  United Kingdom  has a  de facto  or "unwritten" constitution. ref cite book last Barnett first H. title Constitutional and Administrative Law publisher Cavendish location London year 2005 edition 5 pages 9 quote Conversely, "A written constitution is one contained within a single document or a [finite] series of documents, with or without amendments",  id . ref 
 
The  United States  in 1787 began a trend in the writing of constitutions. The  United States Constitution  is also the shortest that people are still using, and it has been changed (amended) many times over the years. It was made after the colonists won their independence from Britain. At first they had the  Articles of Confederation  but the Articles were replaced with today's Constitution.

The Indian constitution of 1950 is the longest ever written constitution in the world. It  has 395 Articles and 12 Schedules in it, divided into 22 parts. It has been amended more than 100 times.

 Related pages 
   Constitutionalism 
   Constitutional economics 
   Democracy 
   International law 
   Jurisprudence 
   Rule of law 
   Social contract 
   US Constitution 

 References 
 reflist 

 Category:Constitutions  