Food

more sources date August 2014 
 File:Foods.jpg thumb|200px|Different  plant s that are eaten. 
 File:FoodMeat.jpg thumb|200px|Different kinds of  meat . 
 File:Good Food Display - NCI Visuals Online.jpg thumb|200px|Different kinds of foods. 

 Food  is what  people  and animals eat. Food usually comes from  animal s or  plant s. It is eaten by living things to provide  energy  and  nutrition . ref http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/212568/food  Definition ref  Food contains the  nutrition  that people and animals need to be healthy. It contains  protein ,  fat ,  carbohydrate s,  vitamin s, and  Dietary mineral minerals . Liquids used for energy and nutrition are often called " drink s".

Food for humans is mostly made through  farming  or  gardening . It includes animal and vegetable sources. Some people refuse to eat food from animal origin, like meat, eggs, and products with milk in them. Not eating meat is called  vegetarianism . Not eating or using any animal products is called  veganism .
{| border="1" align="center"
|-----..........
| colspan="3" align="center" | Basic foods consumed by humans 
|-----
| align="center" | Plant source 
| align="center" | Animal source' 
|-----
|
   Fruit 
   Vegetable s
   Grain s
   Seed s
   Legume s (Beans, peas, lentils, etc.)
   Herb s
   Spice s
| valign="top" |
   Meat 
   Seafood 
   Egg (food) Eggs 
   Dairy product s
|}

Food produced by farmers or gardeners can be changed by industrial processes (the  food industry ). Processed food usually contains several natural ingredients and  food additive s (such as  food preservation preservative s, antioxidants, emulsifiers, flavour enhancers, etc.).

At home, food is prepared in the  kitchen , by the  cooking cook . The cook sometimes uses a  cookbook . Examples of cooking utensils are  pressure cooker s,  pot s, and  frying pan s.

Food can also be prepared and served in  restaurant s or  refectory  (in particular for kids in school).

The utensils used may be a  plate ,  knife ,  fork ,  chopsticks ,  spoon ,  bowl , or  spork .

Many people do not grow their own food. They have to buy food that was grown by someone else. People  trade buy  most of their food in  shop s or  market s. But some people still grow most or all of their own food.

People may buy food and take it home to  cooking cook  it. They may buy food that is ready to eat from a  market street vendor  or a  restaurant .

  Food-related issues  
Food shortage is still a big problem in the world today. Many people do not have enough money to buy the food that they need. Bad  weather  or other problems sometimes destroy the growing food in one part of the world. When people do not have enough food, we say that they are  hunger hungry . If they do not eat enough food for a long time, they will become  disease sick  and die from  starvation . In areas where many people do not have enough food, we say that there is  famine  there.

Food and water can make people  Illness sick  if it is contaminated by  microorganism s,  bad metals , or chemicals.

If people do not eat the right foods, they can become sick.
 If people do not eat enough protein, they get the disease called  kwashiorkor .
 If they do not eat enough  thiamine vitamin B1  ( thiamine ), they get the disease called  beriberi .
 If they do not eat enough  ascorbic acid vitamin C , they get the disease called  scurvy .
 If  child ren do not eat enough  vitamin D , they get the disease called  rickets .
If people eat too much food, they can become  overweight  or  obesity obese . This is also bad for people's health.

  Food in religions  
Many cultures or  religion s have food taboos. That means they have rules what people should not eat, or how the food has to be prepared. Examples of religious food rules are the  Kashrut  of  Judaism  and the  Halal  of  Islam , that say that  pig  meat cannot be eaten. In  Hinduism ,  beef  is not allowed to be eaten. Some Christians are  vegetarian'' (someone who does not eat meat) because of their religious beliefs. For example,  Seventh-day Adventist Church  recommends vegetarianism.

  References  
 reflist 
 commonscat Food 
 wikt 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Foods  