Peace

wiktionary 
 Peace  is a time without any  fight s or  war s. In a larger sense, peace (or  peacefulness ) can mean a state of harmony, quiet or calm that is not disturbed by anything at all, like a still  pond  with no dogs

Peace within and among  state s is a  wikt:goal goal  of many people and  organization s. One organization that was set up to bring peace among the nations and try to make war a thing of the past was the  League of Nations  after  World War I .  When it  wikt:failed failed  to stop  World War II , it was replaced by the  United Nations  which tries to make the world peaceful. This means that if any member is attacked or invaded by another country without attacking that country first, the other members will come to help the country that was attacked first. This idea was used by the United Nations to defend both  South Korea  and  Kuwait  when they were attacked.

 Martin Luther King, Jr. Martin Luther King Jr.  wrote in a  http://www.sas.upenn.edu/African_Studies/Articles_Gen/Letter_Birmingham.html letter he sent from the Birmingham jail  that, "True peace is not merely the absence of tension: it is the presence of  :wikt:justice justice ." In other words, Real peace is more than just problems being gone: there must be fairness to have peace.

 Alfred Nobel  created an annual award, the  Nobel Peace Prize , for the person who had done the most to bring peace to the world.

  Religious beliefs and peace  
 File:Justitia et pax - Brescia - Pinacoteca Tosio-Martinengo - 13-4-2002.jpg right|thumb|"Justice and Peace shall kiss" refers to  Psalm  85 

 Buddhist s think that peace can be gotten once all suffering ends. fact date June 2013 To get rid of suffering and get this peace, many try to follow a set of teachings called the  Four Noble Truths fact date June 2013 

 Jews  and  Christians  believe that true peace comes from a personal relationship with  God .  Jesus Christ  (also called the "Prince of Peace" in the  Book of Isaiah ) said: "Peace I leave with you; my peace I give you. I do not give to you as the world gives. Do not let your hearts be troubled and do not be afraid." ( bibleverse John 14:27 NIV )

  Inner peace  
 main Inner peace 
Inner peace (or peace of mind) refers to a state of being  mind mental ly and  spirit ually at peace, with enough  knowledge  and understanding to keep oneself strong in the face of stress. Being "at peace" is considered by many to be healthy and the opposite of being stressed or anxious. Peace of mind is generally associated with bliss and happiness.

Peace of mind, serenity, and calmness are descriptions of a disposition free from the effects of stress. In some cultures, inner peace is considered a state of consciousness or enlightenment that may be cultivated by various forms of training, such as  prayer ,  meditation ,  Tai chi chuan  or  yoga , for example. Many spiritual practices refer to this peace as an experience of knowing oneself.

  Movements and  activism   
  Peace movement  
 Main Peace movement 

A movement that seeks to get ideals such as the ending of a particular war, minimize inter-human violence in a particular place or type of situation, often linked to the goal of achieving  world peace . Means to achieve these ends usually include advocacy of  pacifism ,  nonviolence non-violent resistance ,  conscientious objector ,  diplomacy ,  boycott s,  moral purchasing , supporting anti-war political candidates,  Demonstration (people) demonstrations , and  lobbying  to create legislation on  human rights  or of  international law .

  Theories on peace  
Many different theories of "peace" exist in the world of  peace studies , which involves the study of conflict transformation. The definition of "peace" can vary with religion, culture, or subject of study.

Peace is a state of balance and understanding in yourself and between others, where respect is gained by the acceptance of differences, tolerance persists, conflicts are resolved through dialog, people's rights are respected and their voices are heard, and everyone is at their highest point of serenity without social tension.

  Reference  
   http://www.einaudi.cornell.edu/peaceprogram/ 

 Category:Peace 
 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Society