Police

merge police officer date December 2016 
 File:Police.three.on.patrol.london.arp.jpg thumb|right|250px| Center United Kingdom British  police officers in  London . 
 Police  are a group of people whose job it is to  wikt:enforce enforce   law s, help with  Emergency emergencies , solve  crime s and  protection protect  property. People who work for the police are called  police officers  or  policemen . They work out of a police station. Police are trained in  first aid  and  wikt:rescue rescue , because police officers are often one of the first people to get to a place where people are  illness sick  or  injury injured , such as a  car   accident , or a  fire .

 Powers 
The police have different powers to help them do their  job . These powers are different in different  Country countries . Most police officers have the power to  arrest  people, search people, and search  house s/properties. They sometimes carry  wikt:equipment equipment  such as  gun s,  baton s,  taser s, or  pepper spray . The area where police officers can use these powers is called their  jurisdiction . If officers are outside of their jurisdiction, another police force with jurisdiction can then use their powers.

 Duties 
The police deal with;
  Stopping crime and protecting the public. They do this by  patrol ling on foot in  uniform  and in police cars. This can stop some forms of  crime criminal behavior .
  Investigating crime.  This means that the police find out who did the crime. Some crimes, such as  robbery  or  murder  are investigated by  detective s.
  To help in emergencies or problems that are not crimes. This may be car accidents, fires, or people who are sick or hurt. The police work with  firefighter s,  ambulance s, and rescuers. They might direct  traffic , help lost children, or give traffic  citation ticket s.

 Parts of police departments 
Most police departments have officers in two main groups: a "patrol" group with officers who wear uniforms, and a "detective" group with officers who wear normal clothing. 

 Patrol officers travel through their area. They may travel by foot, on bicycle or motorcyle, or in marked cars. The cars have warning lights and sirens that can be used. The sirens make a loud sound. Patrol officers enforce  motor vehicle  and  crime criminal  laws. In some locations patrol officers manage the local  jail .
 Detectives work on  investigation s that are more complex. They try to find  fraud ,  illegal drug s, and  Sexual intercourse sex  crimes like  prostitution ,  human trafficking , and  rape . Prostitution is not a crime in all countries.

Not all countries use the same words to describe these groups. In the  United Kingdom , for example, patrol officers form the "uniform branch", while detectives work within the CID ("Criminal Investigation Department"). 

Police uniforms, equipment and methods vary depending on the country. In some places, groups of police train for special jobs such as dealing with  riot s or dealing with highly dangerous criminals. 

 File:Police Poland 2 AB.jpg thumb|right|200px|A  Poland Polish  police officer with some of his equipment 
 Police in different countries 
Different countries have different names for their police.  In  Ireland , they are called the  Garda . In  Russia , they were called the  Militsiyer  until 2012; now, they are called the  Politsiyer . Other names for police services are sheriff's office, marshal's office or department of public safety.  In the same country there can be different types of police officers who have powers in different areas and situations, such as  state  police,  military  police and local police. 

Worldwide, police are a small percentage of the number of people they serve. On  average  there are 303.3 police officers per 100,000 people. ref International Statistics on Crime and Justice , eds. S. Harrendorf; M. Heiskanen; S. Malby (Helsinki, European Institute for United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), 2010), p. 115 ref  

 File:Picassoz03x.JPG thumb|A  Spain Spanish  police car 

 Equipment 
In many countries, police officers carry  gun s during their normal duties. In other countries, like the United Kingdom,  New Zealand , and the Republic of Ireland, most police officers do not carry guns.

Officers communicate using  radio  devices. The radios can be on both the uniform and in the patrol vehicle. 

 Related pages 
 Police officer 
 SWAT team 

  References  
 commons Police 
 reflist 

 Category:Law 
 Category:Emergency services 
 Category:Police  