Emphysema

File:Centrilobular emphysema 865 lores.jpg thumb|A section of a deceased person's lung that shows severe emphysema. The black "bubbles" are emphysemous  alveoli  that have expanded and become filed with black  carbon  that is from  Tobacco smoking 
 File:Emphysema2008.jpg right|thumb|A  chest thoracic   X-ray  of a person with emphysema. At the arrow in the left lung (right side of picture) can be seen a faint bubbly section that looks like a  ghost ly bunch of  grape s. This is emphysema 
 File:Emphysema low mag.jpg thumb|This  microscope  image shows the very large expanded sections of lung tissue. These "holes" should be tiny and there should be thousands of them, instead of only hundreds|218x218px 

 Emphysema  is a disease of the  lung s. 

It is one of the diseases that make up  chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  (COPD). This is a set of diseases where the flow of air in the lungs is obstructed. Emphysema is most often caused by  Tobacco smoking  but can be caused by other diseases or have no known cause at all.

It occurs when the very small air sacs (called the  alveoli ) at the ends of the airways in the lungs start to break down from many sacs to form much bigger sacs. The alveoli are the areas of the lung where  oxygen  and  carbon dioxide  are exchanged into and out of the blood. Emphysema makes it hard for people to blow air out of the lungs because air gets trapped inside the broken alveoli due to the collapse of the walls. 



 Associations 
Emphysema is commonly associated with  chronic   bronchitis . As it is rather difficult to delineate "pure" cases of emphysema or chronic bronchitis they are classed together into  chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  (COPD).

  Other websites  
   http://goldcopd.com Global initiative for chronic obstructive lung disease 

There is no cure for emphysema. Treatment includes to stop smoking and taking medicines ('broncho-dilators' and sometimes cortico steroid s). Supplemental  oxygen  is recommended in those with low oxygen levels at rest. It decreases the risk of heart failure and death if used 15 hours per day, and may improve people's ability to exercise. In those with normal or mildly low oxygen levels, oxygen supplementation may improve shortness of breath. There is a risk of fires and little benefit when those on oxygen continue to smoke.
 File:Wheelchair Basketball Team.JPG thumb  

  

 Category:Diseases 
 Category:Pulmonology