God

about "God" in the context of  monotheism the general concept of "a god" Deity  
 complex date November 2011 
 File:Brahma Halebid.jpg thumb| Brahma  is the creator god in  Hinduism . Brahma,  Shiva  and  Vishnu  are the most important Hindu gods. This image shows Brahma on a  temple  wall.  

 God  is the creator of the Earth and of everything else, according to certain  religion s and  List of mythologies mythologies .  Hinduism  says that there is more than one god.  Theist s believe that God created everything that  wikt:exist exist s and has ever existed. ref name Swinburne citation  last Swinburne  first R.G.  chapter God  editor Honderich, Ted  title The Oxford Companion to Philosophy  publisher Oxford University Press  year 1995  quote ...most philosophical theologians... have generally regarded him as a personal being, bodiless, omnipresent, creator and sustainer of any universe there may be, perfectly free, omnipotent, omniscient, perfectly good, and a source of moral obligation; who exists eternally and necessarily... . ref  In most religions, God is believed to be immortal (cannot die), and to have powers to control nature far beyond the powers of humans.

The belief that there is at least one god is usually called  theism . People who reject belief that any deities exist are called  atheism atheists .  Agnosticism Agnostics  think we cannot know for sure whether any deities exist, but still might (or might not) believe at least one deity exists. People who believe in a god but not in religion are called  deists . People who believe that the definition of " God " should be defined before taking a theological position are  Ignosticism ignostic .

In some religions there are many  Deity gods . This is called  polytheism . In other religions, there is only one, which is called  monotheism . In polytheism the word "gods" is usually written in lowercase letters.  God  is usually written with an uppercase letter when only one god is believed to exist. Some polytheists also use uppercase when talking about their most important god.

  Does God exist?  
Many people have asked themselves if God exists. Philosophers, theologians, and others have tried to prove that he exists, and others have tried to disprove the theory. In  Philosophy philosophical  terminology, such arguments are about the  epistemology  of the  ontology  of God. The debate exists mainly in philosophy, as science does not address whether or not  supernatural  things exist.

There are many philosophical issues with the existence of God. Some definitions of God are not specific. ref http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2002/entries/omnipotence/ ref  Arguments for the existence of God typically include  metaphysics metaphysical ,  empiricism empirical ,  inductive reasoning inductive , and subjective types. Some theories are built around holes in  evolution evolutionary theory , as well as order and complexity in the  world . Arguments against the existence of God typically include empirical,  deductive reasoning deductive , and inductive arguments. Conclusions sometimes include: "God does not exist" ( atheism strong atheism ); "God almost certainly does not exist" ref name Dawkins cite web 
  last Dawkins 
  first Richard 
  authorlink Richard Dawkins 
  title Why There Almost Certainly Is No God 
  url http://www.huffingtonpost.com/richard-dawkins/why-there-almost-certainl_b_32164.html  
  accessdate 2007-01-10
  publisher The Huffington Post ref  ( de facto   atheism ); "no one knows whether God exists" ( agnosticism ); "God exists, but this cannot be proven or disproven" ( deism  or  theism ); and "God exists and this can be proven" (theism). There are many variations on these positions, and sometimes different names for some of them. For example, the position "God exists and this can be proven" is sometimes called "gnostic theism" or "strong theism".

 Names 
There are different names for God in different religions. Some examples are  Allah  in Islam,  Yahweh  or  Elohim  in Judaism,  God in the Baha'i Faith Baha  in  Baha'i Faith ,  Waheguru  in Sikhism, and  Ahura Mazda  in Zoroastrianism.

  Believing in God  
 File:Europe belief in god.svg thumb|250px|The percentage of people in European countries who said in 2005 that they "believe there is a God". Countries with  Eastern Orthodox  (i.e.:  Greece ,  Romania , etc.) or  Muslim  (Turkey) majorities tend to poll highest. 
In the year  2000, approximately 53% of the world's population were part of one of the three main Abrahamic religions (33% Christian, 20% Islam,  less than 1% Judaism), 6% with Buddhism, 13% with Hinduism, 6% with  Chinese folk religion traditional Chinese religion , 7% with various other religions, and less than 15% as non-religious. Most of these religious beliefs involve God or gods. ref National Geographic Family Reference Atlas of the World p. 49 ref 

  God in the Abrahamic religions  
 Abrahamic religions  are very popular monotheistic ones. Well-known Abrahamic religions include  Judaism ,  Christianity , and  Islam .   Monotheistic  means the people in these religions believe there is only one God.  The name of God is usually not allowed to be said in  Judaism , but some Jews today call him  YHWH  (Yahweh) or Jehovah.  Muslim s say the word  Allah , which is the  Arabic language Arabic  word for "The God." 

Believers in the Abrahamic religions (except Islamic believers) believe that God has created  human beings  in his  image  or  wikt:likeness likeness , but this idea is rarely taken literally. The idea of an old man with a beard has been used in art since the  Renaissance .

  God in Christianity  
 main God in Christianity 
The  Christian   Bible  talks about God in different ways. Christians say that the  Old Testament  talks about "God the Father". The  New Testament  is about  Jesus , or "God the Son". Many Christians also believe that Jesus was God's  incarnation  on earth.  Christians consider the  Holy Spirit  to be God as well.

In the  New Testament , there are three beings who are said to be God in different forms: the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit (also known as the Holy Ghost). This is called the  Trinity Holy Trinity  by most people who believe in it. Although the word "Trinity" is not in the Bible, the word used for God in chapter one of  Genesis  is  plural , and the words ' in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit' are used in the  New Testament , (e.g.  Gospel of Matthew Matthew  28:19) Another word that most Christians believe means the same thing as "Trinity" is Godhead. 

Some believe that Jesus was just a man that talked about God. Members of the  Unitarian Church  have this beliefs.

Christians believe that  incarnation God turned into a man  named  Jesus , and came to Earth to save everyone from  sin . When Jesus prayed and talked to God, he called him "Father," and taught others to do the same.

  God in Eastern religions  
In  Hinduism , there is only one God, named  Brahman , but Brahman is said to have taken on many different  incarnation s. Some of these are  Rama ,  Krishna ,  Buddha ,  Shiva ,  Kali ,  Parvati , and  Durga . To many outsiders, the worship of God's different incarnations is considered to be the worship of many gods. However, it is really only the worship of one God in different ways.

Some Hindus also believe that the spirit of God lives in everyone. This idea is called  Advaita Vedanta , which is the Hindu term for  Monism .

Religions like  Buddhism  and  Confucianism  involve the worship of many gods, or sometimes no gods at all.

  God in Western philosophy  
Philosophers can talk about God or god; sometimes they talk about a specific god, but other times they are just talking about the idea of god.

One of the earliest Western philosophers to write about God in a monotheistic way was the  Ancient Greece Greek   Aristotle , who describes god as the Supreme Cause. Aristotle saw God as a being that makes everything happen, but is not influenced by anything else.

There are also some philosophical problems with God. One of them is called  God paradox . It is a question about whether (an omnipotent) God can make a mountain that is so heavy he cannot lift it.

 Related pages 
 Thomas Aquinas 
 Immanuel Kant 

  References  
 sisterlinks 
 reflist 

 Christianityfooter 

 Category:Gods and goddesses