Basque Country (greater region)

The  Basque Country  (called  Euskal Herria  by its inhabitants) is a region in South-West Europe, that is contained within the borders of  France  and  Spain .

  Description  
It is the home of the  Basque people . It is at the western end of the  Pyrenees  on the  Bay of Biscay . Its boundaries are complicated. The greater Basque Country consists of seven districts--four within  Spain  and three within  France . 

  History  
  Origins  
No one knows when the Basques came to Europe. Many say they have been there since the  Neolithic  period at the end of the  Stone Age , others say even before then. 

The first information about the Basque Country is from Roman times. According to evidence, the Basque people already spoke  Basque language their own language  by then. After the fall of  Roman Empire , the Basque Country was isolated from the invading  Goths .

  Middle Ages  
During the Muslim invasion of South Europe, the Basque Country split in two: The Castillian and the Navarran lands. A war with France split the Navarran zone in two. 

After the  Reconquista , the Castillian Basque lands and Navarra became part of the new country: Spain. Since then, Basque people from the Spanish area of the Basque Country have had their own government, and fought to gain the northern part of the Basque Country from France.

  Now  
Today, three of the Basque districts in Spain-- Araba ,  Bizkaia , and  Gipuzkoa --form a political unit known as an autonomous community of Spain. This three-district community is called the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country. It is one of 17 autonomous communities in Spain.

The fourth Basque district in Spain-- Navarra --is its own separate autonomous Community of Spain.

The three districts which form the North (French) Basque Country are Lapurdi (Labourd), Nafarroa Beherea (Basse-Navarre) and Zuberoa/Xiberoa (Soule).

  Population  

The entire Basque region has a surface area of 20,664 km sup 2 sup  (square  kilometer s), 7,978 sq mi. The Autonomous Community of the Euskadi covers 7,234 km sup 2 sup  (square kilometers) or 2,793 sq mi. The population of the Autonomous Community is about 2,000,000--about 5% of the total population of Spain. The  Basque language  and Spanish are spoken there. The most important city is  Bilbao , but the parliament is in  Vitoria-Gasteiz .

  Famous Basque people  

   Miguel de Unamuno 
   Maurice Ravel  (through his mother)
   Che Guevara  (through his mother)
  St.  Ignatius Loyola 
   Louis Daguerre 
   Pio Baroja 

  Most important cities in the Basque Country  

   Bilbao 
   Donostia 
   Vitoria-Gasteiz Gazteiz 
   Iruna 
   Biarritz 
   Baiona 
   Maule 
   Donibane Garazi 

  Other websites  
   http://www.euskadi.net The official website of the Basque Autonomous Community 

 Category:Geography of France 
 Category:Geography of Spain