Fruit

File:Mature flower diagram.svg thumb|400px|Diagram of flower, cut open, showing the  ovary (botany) ovary  

In  botany , a  fruit  is a plant structure that contains the plant's  seed s. To a botanist, the word  fruit  is used only if it comes from the part of the  flower  which was an  ovary (botany) ovary . ref Mauseth, James D. 2003.  Botany: an introduction to plant biology . Jones & Bartlett, Boston. ref  It is an extra layer round the seeds, which may or may not be fleshy. However, even in the field of botany, there is no general agreement on how fruits should be classified. Many do have extra layers from other parts of the flower. ref Schlegel, Rolf 2003.  Encyclopedic dictionary of plant breeding and related subjects . Haworth Press. ISBN 1-56022-950-0. ref 

In general speech, and especially in  cooking , fruits are a sweet product, and many botanical fruits are known as  vegetable s. This is how ordinary people use the words. On this page, we describe what botanists call a fruit.

The fleshy part of a fruit is called the mesocarp. It is between the fruit's skin (exocarp) and the seeds. The white part of an  apple , for example, is the "fleshy" part of the apple. Usually, when we eat a fruit, we eat the "fleshy" part.

  Types of fruits  
 File:Grapes.jpg thumb|thumb|left|140px|alt=Grapes hanging on a branch|Grapes are berries 

 Berry 
If the entire fruit is fleshy, except for maybe a thin skin, we call the fruit a  berry . A berry might contain one seed or many.  Grape s,  avocado s, and  blueberry blueberries  are berries. They all have a thin skin, but most of the fruit is fleshy.  Strawberry Strawberries , however, are actually  not  berries, because the seeds are on the outside: on a real berry, the seed or seeds must be inside.

 Pepo 
A pepo (pronounced  pee' po ) is a  wikt:modify modified  berry. Its skin is hard and thick and is usually called a "rind".  Pumpkin s and  watermelon s, for instance, are pepos.

 Hesperidium 
 File:Citrus fruits.jpg thumb|170px|Citrus fruits are hesperidiums 
A hesperidium is another modified berry. It has a  leather y skin that is not as hard as the skin of a pepo. All  citrus  fruit like  Orange (fruit) oranges  and  lemon  are hesperidiums.

 Pome 
 File:PearPhoto.jpg thumb|left|120px|Pears have a core surrounded by flesh, meaning pears are pomes 

A  pome  (pohm) is a fruit that has a  wikt:core core  surrounded by fleshy  Tissue (biology) tissue  that we can eat. The core is usually not eaten. Berries are different - the seeds are  inside  the fleshy part, not separated from it by a core.  Apple s and  pear s are pomes.

 Drupe 
 File:Autumn Red peaches.jpg thumb|170px|The big hard "pit" in the middle of this peach has a seed inside it 
Drupes are also called  stone fruit . A drupe is a fleshy fruit with a hard stone around the seed. We usually call this stone the "pit" of the fruit.  Peach es and  Olive (fruit) olives  are drupes. Actually, the  almond  fruit is a drupe, too, though we eat the seed that is inside the "pit" of the  almond  fruit.

  Botanical fruits  
Since fruits are produced from fertilised ovaries in  flower s, only  flowering plant s produce fruits. Fruits are an  evolution ary 'invention' which help  seed s get  wikt:dispersal dispersed  by animals.

The botanical term includes many that are not "fruits" in the common sense of the term. such as the vegetables  Squash (plant) squash ,  pumpkin s,  cucumber s,  tomato ,  pea s,  bean s,  corn ,  eggplant , and  sweet pepper  and some spices, such as  allspice  and  chillie s.

  Accessory fruits  
 File:FraiseFruitPhoto.jpg right|thumb|A  Strawberry  fruit: the 'seeds' are each derived from a  pistil  of the flower. 
An accessory fruit or false fruit (pseudocarp) is a fruit in which some of the flesh is derived not from the ovary but from some adjacent tissue.

A fig is a type of accessory fruit called a syconium.  Pome s, such as  apple s and  pear s, are also accessory fruits: the core is the true fruit. ref Esau K. 1977.  Anatomy of seed plants . Wiley New York. ref 

  Non-botanical fruits  
Strictly speaking, these are not botanical fruits: 
  any produced by non-flowering plants, like  juniper  berries, which are the seed-containing female cones of conifers.
  fleshy fruit-like growths that develop from other plant tissues (like  rhubarb ).

  Area of agreement  
 File:vaccinium.jpg thumb|Berries which are simple fleshy fruit. From top right:  Cranberry cranberries ,  lingonberries ,  blueberries  red  Huckleberry huckleberries 

These are fruits which you can buy in shops, and which are also acceptable as botanical fruits:
   berry fruits :  redcurrant ,  gooseberry ,  cranberry ,  blueberry  Also, but not commonly known as berry fruits, are  tomato ,  avocado ,   banana 
   false berries :  blackberry ,  strawberry ,  raspberry : they are aggregate fruits (see below). The  yew  berry is not a fruit at all because the yew is a  conifer . ref Note: the seed in a yew "berry" is very poisonous. ref 
   stone fruit s or drupes:  plum ,  cherry ,  peach ,  apricot ,  Olive (fruit) olive 
   citrus citrus fruits , like  orange (fruit) oranges ,  grapefruit s, and  tangerine s
   aggregate fruit s:  raspberry raspberries ,  blackberry blackberries 
   multiple fruit s:  pineapple s,  fig s

Many fruits come from  tree s or  shrub bushes . For plants, fruits are a means of dispersal, usually by  animal s. When the fruit breaks apart, the seeds can go into the ground and begin to grow. Most fruits we eat contain a lot of  water  and natural  sugar s, and many are high in  Vitamin C . They have a large amount of  dietary fibre . Fruits are usually low in  protein  and  fat  content, but avocados and some nuts are exceptions to this. Not only  human s, but our closest living relatives ( primate s) are keen fruit-eaters. So are many other groups of  herbivorous   mammal s and many  bird s. ref Lewis, Robert A. 2002.  CRC dictionary of agricultural sciences . CRC Press. ISBN 0-8493-2327-4 ref 

  Seedless fruits  
Seedlessness is an important feature of some fruits of commerce. Commercial bananas, pineapple, and  watermelon s are examples of seedless fruits. Some  citrus  fruits, especially oranges, satsumas, mandarin oranges, and  grapefruit  are valued for their seedlessness.

Seedless bananas and grapes are  ploidy triploids , and seedlessness results from the abortion of the  embryo nic plant which is produced by fertilisation. The method requires normal pollination and fertilisation. ref Spiegel-Roy P. Goldschmidt E.E. 1996.  The biology of citrus . Cambridge. ISBN 0-521-33321-0 p87-88 ref 

 Related pages 
   List of fruit 
   Diospyros 

  References  
 Reflist 

 Fruits 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Fruits  