Communication

File:Rudy Giuliani speaking.jpg px257|thumb| Rudy Giuliani  communicating with a  microphone 

 Communication  is when  information  is passed from a sender to a recipient using a  Media medium . There are different media that can be used:
 Visual communication (using  body language  or  gesture s)
 Communicating with  sound s (like human  language , but may also be the barking of a  dog )
 Communication using  touch 
 Using  Olfaction smell 
 Using  writing 

Communication can be good  wikt:speak spoken  (a word) or non-spoken (a  smile ). Communication has many ways, and happens all the time. Not only humans communicate, most other animals do too. Some communication is done without thinking, such as by changing in  Nonverbal communication posture .

Another form of communication tries to change somebody's mind. In an extreme case it can be  propaganda .

 File:communication.gif 200px|thumb|right|This is similar to  communication  by talking 

  How communication works  
Communication works by exchanging information or messages. In very basic terms
 The sender makes a message, from an idea. This is usually called  encoding 
 The sender transmits the message through the medium.
 The recipient receives the message and  decodes  it.

Besides the content of the message, there are other things that are important. These are not part of the message itself, but rather of its  context 
 Who is communicating, and what status does the communicator have.
 Communication messages usually do not come alone, but are accompanied by other messages. These are also interpreted.

For a message exchange to be successful, the sender and the recipient must have agreed on a vocabulary. The word  wikt:hedge hedge  can mean completely different things based on the context. In  biology  a hedge is a row of  shrub s or  tree s that make a barrier or form a  border . In  finance , a hedge is an  investment  made to reduce the  risk  of another investment. In  linguistics  a hedge is a word or set of words that make other words less important. Without any information it is therefore very difficult to know which  hedge  is really meant by the speaker.

 Related pages 
 commonscat 
 Language 
 Sign language 

 Category:Communication   

