Blood

Blood  is a  liquid  in  human s and many  animal s except  insect s. Blood is pushed through the  organism  by the  heart , and brings  nutrient s and  oxygen  to our  tissue (biological) tissues . It also takes away  waste  and  carbon dioxide  from  tissue s.  ref 
 cite web  url            http://www.fi.edu/learn/heart/blood/blood.html 
  title         Blood - the human heart  accessdate    19 March 2009  author        The Franklin Institute  ref 

Blood of  vertebrates  is made up of  blood plasma  and various  cells  --  red blood cells ,  white blood cells  and  platelets .  Platelets  help  blood clot blood to clot .  Hemoglobin  is in red blood cells. White blood cells help fight  infection s and heal  wound wounds .

  Plasma  
Blood plasma is the yellow liquid in which blood cells float. Plasma is made up of nutrients,  electrolyte s ( salts ),  gas es, non-protein hormones, waste,  lipid s, and proteins.
These proteins are  albumin ,  antibody antibodies  (also called  immunoglobulins ), clotting factors, and protein  hormone s. Plasma that does not have the protein  fibrinogen  is called serum and cannot clot. Adults have about 3 liters of plasma. Plasma is a liquid, mostly water (90%). Plasma takes up 55% of  volume.

  Red blood cells  
 File:Redbloodcells.jpg frame|275px|Red blood cells 
Another name for red blood cell is  erythrocyte . 'Erythro' means red; 'cyte' means cell.  RBC  is an  acronym  for  r ed  b lood  c ells.

RBCs carry  oxygen  and  carbon dioxide  around our body.  Cell s in our body need oxygen to live. Cells also make carbon dioxide as a waste. RBCs bring more oxygen around the body. They also take away the carbon dioxide.

RBCs are filled with  haemoglobin . This is a protein. It is made to carry a large amount of oxygen. Haemoglobin has  iron  in it. The iron and oxygen gives haemoglobin its red color. This is why blood is red.  Erythropoietin  promotes the creation of RBCs.  Blood type   antigen s are carried on the surface of red cells.

RBCs also help the blood stay normal  pH . The blood needs a to be at a pH of 7.4. If it is much more or less than 7.4 a person can get very sick or die. RBCs are a  Buffer solution buffer  for the blood pH. Buffer means that it stops changes in pH. The proteins and the carbon dioxide in the RBC are buffers for the blood.
If you do not have enough RBCs, you will die.

  White blood cells  
 White blood cell s are a big part of the  immune system . They attack things that do not belong in the body. They kill germs such as  bacteria  and  virus es. They kill  cancer  cells. White blood cells also help to fight other toxic substances.

White blood cells find where the germs are, and start to destroy them. WBCs arrive in the blood. They also go out of the blood in places where there is infection. WBCs do this to fight the germs that make the infection. If they go out of the blood to fight an  infection , they may return in the  lymphatic system . So WBCs are in  lymph nodes . 

Another name for white blood cell is  leukocyte . Leuko means white. -cyte means cell.  WBC  is an  acronym  for  w hite  b lood  c ell. There are three main kinds of WBCs. They are  lymphocyte s,  White blood cells#Granulocytes granulocytes  and  monocytes . Some of the WBCs mature into cells which do similar work in the tissues.

The different WBCs work in different ways. Some WBCs kill and eat germs and cancer cells. Some WBCs make  antibody antibodies . These are proteins that stick to a cell and tell other WBCs to kill it. Some WBCs make chemicals. They release these chemicals to fight things that do not belong in the body. These chemicals cause  inflammation  in a part of the body. When a germ makes someone sick, the body shows it. If a  bacteria  gets under someone's skin and causes an  infection , the skin gets red, hot, and painful. This redness, heat, and pain are signs of  inflammation . This shows that WBCs are fighting the infection and killing the bacteria.

  Platelets  
Platelets help make blood clot. ref Platelets are also called 'thrombocytes'. ref  A clot is when the  liquid  blood becomes  solid . The body makes blood clot when the skin is cut. This stops blood from going out of the skin too much. 

For blood to be able to clot is essential. But, rarely, some blood clots are bad. If a blood clot happens in a  blood vessel  going to the brain, it can cause a  stroke . If it happens in a blood vessel going to the heart, it can cause a  heart attack . This does not usually happen to young, healthy people. 

Platelets are not the only things that make clots. There are proteins in the blood that help make clots. Both platelets and  clotting proteins  are needed to make good clots.

  Where does blood come from?  
 File:Gray72.png 300px|thumb|right|Illustration of bone marrow cells from  Gray's Anatomy 
Blood cells are made in the  bone marrow  and in the  spleen . The bone marrow is the soft material in the middle of bones. Special cells in the bone marrow make most of the blood cells in your body.

Plasma proteins are made mostly by the  liver . The water and electrolytes in plasma come from the food and water that you eat.

Although blood is a  fluid , in some respects it is a kind of  connective tissue . Its cells  originate in  bone marrow  and the  spleen , and in the blood there are potential molecular fibres in the form of  fibrinogen . These are activated when a  blood clot  forms.

  References  
 references 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Biochemistry 
 Category:Cardiovascular system 
 Category:Blood  