Foot

Foot is also the name of a unit of measurement. See  foot (unit of length) .

 File:Grown man's feet 2.jpg thumb|200px|A man's foot 
 File:Human Feet - female - bruised.jpg thumb|200px|Woman's feet 
 File:Blausen 0411 FootAnatomy.png thumb|170px|Illustration of bones in lower leg and foot 

A  foot  (one  foot , two or more  feet ) is a  body  part on the end of a  leg . We use it when walking, and it is important for balance: it helps us stand straight. We also use it to  kick , in both  fighting  and  sport s,  football  being an example.

People's hands and feet have the same shape: they both have five  digits  (the fingers and toes). Many other  Vertebrate animals with backbones  also have five digits. The part of the foot which joins it to the leg is called the  heel . The bottom of the foot is called the  sole . Half the bones in our body are in the foot. Doctors who work with people's feet are  podiatrists  or  chiropodists .

Many  animal s have feet, and there are many different sorts of foot. The feet of  monkey s are much like the hands. The hard foot of an  ungulate  is a  hoof . When an animal has soft feet, or feet with soft parts on the underside, we often call it a  paw . 

In many societies, people like to cover the foot when they are with others, especially outside. In many cultures (for example  North America n,  Europe an,  Japan ese and others) people wear clothing over the foot to keep it safe. This  footwear  has special names, for example  sandals ,  shoe s , and  boot s . When people always wear footwear, especially in hot places or when they are very active, their feet can smell badly ( foot odour''). If footwear is too big or small, it can be bad for the feet when the person wears the shoe because it can cause long term damage. People who have foot, leg, and back problems can also get help from special shoes. 

People have different traditions in different parts of the world for when to wear footwear. For example, in much of Europe and  Canada , people usually do not wear their shoes or boots in a home or visiting. In the United States people often wear shoes inside a home. In Japan, people do not wear shoes in homes, and floors are often made of very soft materials, too soft for shoes. In cultures where people always wear shoes, people sometimes think it is bad not to wear them. Not wearing shoes can be good for the feet, especially for children's feet.

Conditions like  Athlete's foot  affect the feet, causing the feet to feel dry and cracked.

  Bones  
In a human foot, there are 26  bone s. They are made up of 14  phalanges  ( toes ), 5  metatarsals  ( sole  bones) and 7  tarsals  ( ankle  bones).

  Gallery  
 gallery 
File:Medical X-Ray imaging ILJ05 nevit.jpg
File:Sindactilia.jpg
File:Womens foot in shoes.jpg
File:Grown man's feet 1.jpg
 gallery 

 commonscat Feet 


 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Feet  