Pop music

refimprove date June 2014 
"Pop" music is a type of  popular   music  that many people like to listen to. The term "pop music" can be used for all kinds of music that was written to be popular. The word "pop music" was used from about 1880 onwards, when a type of music called music was popular.   genre Styles  of pop music in the 2010s (today) include  rock and roll rock music ,  electronic dance music  and  hip hop .

 History 
Modern pop music grew out of 1950s  rock and roll , (for example  Chuck Berry ,  Bo Diddley  and  Little Richard ) and  rockabilly  (for example  Elvis Presley  and  Buddy Holly ). In the 1960s,  The Beatles  became a famous pop music group. In the 1970s, other styles of music were mixed with pop music, such as  funk  and  soul music . Pop music generally has a heavy (strong) beat, so that it is good for dancing. Pop singers normally sing with microphones that are plugged into an  amplifier  and a  loudspeaker .

  How does the business of pop music work?  
There are also many more people working on pop music who are not seen on the  stage (theatre) stage  or in the  video . These people include the  studio  staff (people who help the musicians to record CDs and music videos in music studios), production staff (people who help make the music recordings sound good), distribution staff (people who help sell the music to stores) and retail staff (people that sell the music to people at CD stores).

Tour staff help the band to travel around the country (or around the world) for their concert tours. Some tour staff help by carrying heavy  musical instrument s onto the stage. Other tour staff drive buses or cars, so that the band can get to the concert. Some tour staff operate sound equipment, such as the large  amplifier s and  loudspeaker s that are used to amplify (make louder) the band's music for the audience.

Promotional staff help to market or promote the band's music, so that more people will know about the band, and buy the band's CDs. Some promotional staff travel to radio stations and give the band's CD to radio station managers or DJs (disk jockeys: the people who announce songs on the radio). Other promotional staff write press releases (short articles) about the band which are sent to the newspapers.

  Types of music that became pop music  
Pop music came from the  Rock and Roll  movement of the early  1950s , when  vinyl record record  companies recorded songs that they thought that  teenager s would like. Pop music usually uses musical from the other types of music that are popular at the time. Many different styles of music have become pop music during different time periods. Often, music companies create pop music styles by taking a style of music that only a small number of people were listening to, and then making that music more popular by marketing it to teenagers and young adults.

In the 1950s, recording companies took  blues -influenced  rock and roll  (for example  Chuck Berry sfn  Gilliland  1969  loc show 5  and  Bo Diddley sfn  Gilliland  1969  loc show 3 ) and  rockabilly  (for example  Carl Perkins sfn  Gilliland  1969  loc show 8  and  Buddy Holly sfn  Gilliland  1969  loc show 12 ) and promoted them as pop music. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, record companies took  folk music  bands and musicians and helped them to create a new type of music called folk rock or acid rock. Folk rock and acid rock mixed folk music,  blues  and  rock and roll  (for example  The Byrds sfn  Gilliland  1969  loc show 33  and  Janis Joplin sfn  Gilliland  1969  loc show 41 ). In the  1970s , record companies created several harder, louder type of blues called  blues rock  or  Heavy metal music heavy metal , which became a type of pop music (for example the bands  Led Zeppelin  and  Judas Priest ).

In the late 1970s and early 1980s, a type of  nightclub  dance music called  Disco  turned into a popular type of pop music. Record companies took an experimental, strange-sounding type of music called  New Wave  music from the  1980s  and turned it into pop music bands such as  The Cars .  In the  1990s  record companies took an underground type of hard rock called  Grunge  (for example the band  Nirvana (band) Nirvana ).  Michael Jackson  was also a very influential artist for pop music. His album,  Thriller (Michael Jackson album) Thriller , is the best-selling album of all time. He also wrote some other very influential songs, such as " Bad (song) Bad ", "Give In to Me", "Will You Be There", "Heal the World", "We Are the World", "Black or White", and " Billie Jean ", just to name a few. By the 21st century (after the demise of  disco  in the 1980s)   Contemporary R&B  became pop music. Examples of  Contemporary R&B  artists that have a wide pop appeal are  Usher ,  Beyonce ,  Rihanna ,  Chris Brown (entertainer) Chris Brown  and more.

 Sources 
 reflist 25em 

  Other websites  
   http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j1mzDlGaOm0 Example of pop music 
 Gilliland  title Radio documentary about pop music 

 Category:Pop music  