American English

American English  or  United States English  is the  dialect  of  English language  spoken in the  United States United States of America . It is different in some ways from other types of English, such as  British English . Many types of American English came from local dialects in England.

Many people today know about American English even if they live in a country where another sort of English is spoken. This may be because people hear and read American English through the  mass media media , for example  CNN  television, and the  Internet , where the most common form of English is American English.

Because people all over the world use American English as well as other types of English, the English language gets new words. Because of this, English has been changing for hundreds of years. For example, the English language spoken in  India , which has more than one billion people, keeps adding more American English words to go along with its British English base and many other words from any of the 200+ Indian languages.

Sometimes people learn American English as it is spoken in America. For example, in telephone call centers in India and other places, people often learn American English to sound more like their customers who call from America. These people often keep using American English in everyday life.

The meaning of many words are different in American English. Most changes in a language start with small things. For example,  Italian language Italian ,  Spanish language Spanish , and  French language French  all came from  Latin .

 Spelling in American English 
There are many words that sound the same in both American English and British English, but are spelled differently.  For example:

 Words originally from French that end in "-our" in British English (behaviour, colour, honour, neighbour, etc.) end in "-or" in American English (behavior, color, honor, neighbor). 
 br Words of that come from French that end in -re in British English (metre, centre) end in -er in American English. In these cases  Canadian  usage is to keep the British (and French) spelling.
 Verbs that end in -ise in British English (criticise, realise) end in -ize in American English (criticize, organize, realize). However, the -ize ending is optional in British English, and is shown as an option in British dictionaries.
 One of the changes introduced by Noah Webster is the change of the double "l" from words like "travelled" to "traveled". 

Books show that many of these differences come from the writings of English-lover  Noah Webster , who made the American dictionary following the  American War of Independence .

Some more differences in American English:
  aluminium is spelled "aluminum"
  doughnut is spelled "donut"
  draught is spelled "draft"
  gaol (not common) is spelled "jail"
  plough is spelled "plow"

There are also some words in American English that are a bit different from British English, e.g.:
  aeroplane is called "airplane"
  ladybird is called "ladybug"
  lift is called "elevator"
  toilet is called "bathroom", "restroom" or "comfort station"
  lorry is called "truck"
  nappies are called "diapers"
  petrol is called "gas" (or "gasoline")
  the boot of a car is called a "trunk"
  a dummy is called a "pacifier"
  trousers are called "pants"
  underground is called "subway"
  football is called "soccer"
  braces are "suspenders" ("suspenders" in British-English are a type of clothing worn around the lower leg by males to stop socks/sox from sagging, and around the upper leg by women wearing stockings)

  Regional accents  
   R-dropping  is a thing that occurs for  English  speakers in certain places where "r" sound is not pronounced after a  vowel . For  example  as in the words "car" and "card" sounding like "cah" and "cahd". This occurs in the Boston area.

 Category:Dialects of English 
 Category:United States