Asia

File:LocationAsia.png thumb|250px| World   map  showing where Asia is 
 Asia  is the largest  continent  on  Earth . It is in the  north ern  hemisphere . Asia is connected to  Europe  in the west. Together, Asia and Europe are called  Eurasia . Some of the oldest human  civilization s began in Asia, such as  Sumer ,  China , and  India . Asia was also home to some large empires such as the  Persian Empire , the  Mongol Empire , and the  Ming Dynasty Ming Empire .

  Area  
 File:Two-point-equidistant-asia.jpg thumb|right|250px| Geography Geographic  area of  Asia 
The Asian continent is the largest of all continents. Covering about 30% of the world's land area, it has more people than any other continent with about 60% of the world's total  population . Stretching from the icy  Arctic  in the north to the hot and steamy equatorial lands in the south, Asia contains huge, empty  desert s, as well as some of the world's highest mountains and longest rivers. 

Asia is surrounded by the  Mediterranean Sea , the  Black Sea , the  Arctic Ocean , the  Pacific Ocean , and the  Indian Ocean . It is separated from Europe by the  Pontic Mountains  and the  Turkish Straits . A long, mainly land  border  in the west separates Europe and Asia. This line runs North-South down the  Ural Mountains  in Russia, along the  Ural River  to the  Caspian Sea , and through the  Caucasus Mountains  to the Black Sea.

  Eurasian countries  
Some European countries are also partly in Asia. About three-quarters of  Russia  is in Asia, while the rest is in Europe. Small parts of four other Asian countries are in Europe;  Kazakhstan ,  Georgia (country) Georgia ,  Azerbaijan , and  Turkey . Also, the  Sinai Peninsula  of  Egypt  lies in  Western Asia , and the rest of it is in Africa.

  List of Asian Countries  
 flag India 
 flag Bangladesh 
 flag China 
 flag Mongolia 
 flag North Korea 
 flag South Korea 
 flag Vietnam 
 flag Laos 
 flag Myanmar 
 flag Cambodia 
 flag Indonesia 
 flag Philippines 
 flag Malaysia 
 flag Singapore 
 flag Afghanistan 
 flag Bahrain 
 flag Bhutan 
 flag Brunei 
 flag Iran 
 flag Iraq 
 flag Israel 
 flag Japan 
 flag Jordan 
 flag Kazakhstan 
 flag Kuwait 
 flag Kyrgyzstan 
 flag Lebanon 
 flag Maldives 
 flag Nepal 
 flag Oman 
 flag Pakistan 
 flag Qatar 
 flag Saudi Arabia 
 flag Sri Lanka 
 flag Syria 
 flag Taiwan 
 flag Tajikistan 
 flag Thailand 
 flag Turkmenistan 
 flag United Arab Emirates 
 flag Uzbekistan 
 flag Yemen 
 

 Related pages 
 commons 
   Asia Minor 
   Asian Games 
   Southeast Asia 

 Continent 
 Asia 

 Category:Asia  