Beer

Beer is also the name of a place in  Devon ,  England  -  Beer (Devon) 

 File:Lager beer in glass.jpg thumb|right|A glass of beer. This one is Viking, a beer from  Iceland 
 Beer  is an  alcohol ic  drink . It is made with  water ,  hops ,  barley  (types of cereal  grain s), and types of  yeast  (a  fungus  that produces alcohol). A process called  fermentation  turns sugar into alcohol, using yeast. Another product of the fermentation is  carbon dioxide . 

  Classification from the type of fermentation  
In general, all alcoholic drinks where yeast turns sugar into alcohol are called  beer . In these cases,  distillation  is not used. The difference to  wine  is that with wine, sugars from  plant s, such as  fructose fruit sugar , or that made by  animal s is used. As an example,  mead  is a wine made from  honey .  Japan ese  sake  is made from  rice , and uses yeast for fermentation; so even if some people call it  rice wine , sake is really a kind of beer.

  Making beer  
The act of making beer is called "brewing". Beer is made by adding warm water to malted barley and other grains. The  enzyme s in the barley change the malted barley and other grains into simple sugars. This is called the mash. The water is then sparged (drained) from the grain. The water is now called wort. The wort is boiled and hops are added. Hops provide flavour and preserve the beer. After boiling the wort is cooled and yeast is added. The yeast turns the sugars into alcohol and the wort into beer.

Different beers can have different natures, depending on the  wikt:ingredient ingredients  used; for example, an  ale  uses top fermenting yeast. Top fermenting yeasts eat more sugar and produce more alcohol. A  lager  uses bottom fermenting yeast. Bottom fermenting yeasts eat less sugar and produce a crisper, cleaner taste. Adding hops makes the beer more bitter and aromatic. Specialty malts (different types of cooked barley) produce different flavours and colours. These flavours and colours are most notable in dark beers like Porter and Stout.

Different countries have different ways to make beer. In  Germany ,  Austria ,  Switzerland ,  Czech Republic , and  Slovakia , beer is usually made from just hops, malt, water, and yeast. This is because of the  Reinheitsgebot . The Reinheitsgebot was a law that said says that beer can only be made from hops, malt, and water. Yeast was discovered after the Reinheitsgebot. The law was overturned by the European Union in 1992. In Belgium, however, beers have always been made with wheat, sugar, fruit, and other ingredients.

 Different ways to make beer 
The type of yeast used determines the kind of beer made:
  Some kinds of yeast ferment at a higher temperature, usually at 15-20 degC. The fermentation process is quicker.
  Other kinds ferment at a lower temperature, usually 4-8 degC. Beers made with this kind usually have a longer shelf-life.
  Some beers ferment sponaneously from yeast that can be found in the environment.

  The history of beer  

The earliest records of beer were written around 7000 years ago by the  Sumer ians. It is said that the Sumerians discovered the  fermentation  process by accident. It is not known exactly how this happened, but it could be that a piece of  bread  or grain became wet, and a short time later, it began to ferment and made a pulp that caused people to become  intoxication drunk . A seal around 4,000 years old is a Sumerian "Hymn to Ninkasi", the goddess of brewing. This "hymn" is also a  recipe  for making beer. A description of the making of beer on this ancient engraving in the Sumerian language is the earliest account of what is easily recognised as  barley , followed by a  pictograph  of bread being baked, crumbled into water to form a mash, and then made into a drink, that is recorded as having made people feel "...wonderful and blissful". It could even be possible that bread was first baked to be a way to make beer that is easy to carry around. The Sumerians were probably the first people to brew beer. They had found a "divine drink" -- they felt it was a gift from the  Deity gods .
 
  Amount of alcohol in beer  
 Normal  beers have around 3-5 % alcohol (for the volume, i.e. in 100ml beer there is 3-5ml alcohol). In brewing beer, the amount of alcohol can be made more or less quite easily. The  Belgium Belgian  types of beer are made by adding more sugar. Through the fermentation, this will then turn to alcohol. Today, there are beers with between 2% and about 16% of alcohol (about the same alcohol content as  wine ). Spirits can have up to 80% alcohol. Some beer  label s say there is no alcohol in them because it was taken out later. This is not completely true, though. Beers "without alcohol" usually do have less than 1% of alcohol.
 Sister project links Beer 

 Category:Beer  