History of Spain

Spain  is a  country  in  Europe . 
  Early History  
People have lived on the  Iberian Peninsula  for about 500,000 years.  Neanderthal  man came about 200,000 years ago. Modern humans first came about 40,000 years. 

The  Roman Empire  controlled Spain for three hundred years; then people from Eastern Europe called  Visigoths  fought for Spain, won it from the Romans, and controlled Spain for over two hundred years.
 File:Dama de Elche.jpg thumb|right|180px| Lady of Elche  made by the  Iberian s 

 9th century 
The Visigoths converted from  Arian Christianity  to  Roman Catholicism Roman Catholics .  The land was won after a war by  Muslims  who were  Arab  and  Berber people Berber .  Roman Catholics from Europe eventually decided to fight to take Spain from the Muslims. They fought wars for many hundreds of years, some of which were  Crusades  against other  Christian s like the  Cathar s. These were very cruel wars. 

In the year  1492 , they took the last part of Spain that had belonged to the Moors.  Boabdil , the last  Moor ish Leader of  Granada , gave the city to King Ferdinand of Aragon on  2 January   1492 , and Christians now ruled all of Spain.

Before this, several different kings had ruled different countries in what is now called Spain. Two of these countries,  Kingdom of Castile Castile  and  Aragon , came together when the king of Aragon,  Ferdinand II of Aragon Ferdinand II , married the queen of Castile,  Isabella of Castile Isabella .

In the same year, 1492, they decided to send  Christopher Columbus  to explore the  Atlantic Ocean . Columbus found a land there that the people of Europe did not yet know. These were the islands of the  Caribbean Sea .

  Late 15th century  
Columbus and other sailors explored more and found that there were two  continent s there -  North America  and  South America . Spain sent many soldiers and businessmen to North and South America, and they took over very large parts of those two continents. Owning this  empire  made Spain very rich. But when they conquered that empire, they killed millions of the  Native American s who had lived there before. Spain owned this empire for more than three hundred years.

Meanwhile, at home, the Muslim manuscripts had been either burnt or spread to other countries. Jews had been expelled from Spain. The multicultural society was destroyed, and so was the learning. Among the few things kept and respected in Spain were in  music :  harmony  and  stringed instrument s, and of course the buildings, many of which became churches, by adding crosses.

  16th and 17th centuries  
The  Spanish Empire  was the strongest in the world through most of the next two centuries, thanks to  gold  from the  Americas . This new gold made rulers and colonial governors rich. Meanwhile others' savings became worth less due to  inflation . Spain became a society of very rich and very poor. Some of the poorest went to the new colonies in the  Caribbean ,  Central America  and  South America , mostly to find gold.

 Native American  peoples were killed by  disease s brought by the Spaniards, but most Spaniards did not know this. They found damaged and dying societies with people who had lost some of their most important leaders and thinkers. The Spaniards thought this meant they were inferior, and used this as an excuse to enslave the natives. Millions of natives died mining gold for the Spanish.

The Spanish Empire also at this time funded the  Spanish Inquisition  which tortured and killed anyone who disagreed with the  Roman Catholic Church . The  Reformation  which created  Protestant   sect s in Europe was not allowed into Spain, it was kept out and, as with Jews or Muslims, its believers were killed.

The  noble s of Spain no longer had to fight anyone since the internal feuds were over. No one could challenge their power. In many ways it was held together as a  reign of terror . People who challenged them were often called  heretic s, so that the Inquisition could torture them, and then nobles take the property.

For ordinary people on both sides of the  Atlantic Ocean , life got worse. A few rulers got rich. Today we would say that these people were guilty of  war crime s,  genocide  and  crimes against humanity . Many Church people who had the power to speak out at that time, did so, and they said many of the same things as we would say today. But none of this mattered much to the rulers.

The great  satire   Don Quixote  was written about this time.

  18th century 
In the  18th century , there was doubt over who should become king of Spain; this doubt led many of the kings of Europe to fight to become king of Spain. This was called the  War of the Spanish Succession . 

France occupied Spain for a long time. This made Spain very weak. It also made Spain lose its empire in North and South America; all of the parts of that empire became their own countries, or were taken over by other countries such as the  United States United States of America .

  20th century  
There was not much peace in Spain during the first part of the  20th century . Some  Spaniards  tried to set up a government chosen by the people (a  democracy ), and they made the  King  of Spain leave the country. However, in  1936 , two different groups of  Spaniards  went to war over whether the government should be a democracy, or take orders from one person. In  1939 , those who wanted democracy were defeated, and a  dictator  named  Francisco Franco  took over the government.

Franco died in  1975 . He had decided that  Spain  should have a king again, and he chose  Juan Carlos I of Spain Juan Carlos , the grandson of the king who had been forced to leave the country, to be king. But the king did not rule as a dictator; instead, he chose to set up a democracy. Also since Franco's death, Spain appointed  Adolfo Suarez  to became Spain's first democratically elected  Prime Minister of Spain prime minister . Now Spain is a modern democratic country, and does  business  with many countries around the world. It is a part of the  European Union .

 Category:History of Spain  