Anthropology

Anthropology  is the study of  human  beings. (In Greek "Anthropos-" means "human", and "-logy" means " Research study  of".)

Anthropology is a  biology biological  and  history historical   social science  that helps us learn how groups of people are the same, and how they are different in all parts of the  world .  Anthropologist s do  research  in many places and study how people live now and how they may have lived in the past (using the study of  Archaeology ). They research in modern cities, small villages,  tribe s, and in the  countryside . They study how groups of people consider  time ,  Space (physics) space ,  life , etc.

Applied anthropology is a type of anthropology that uses information, discovered using science to help people. One recent use of applied anthropology is the return of ancient ways of successful farming to people living in  South America . Another use of applied anthropology is the learning of languages close to dying out and the teaching of young people the language of their ancestors.

The four big kinds of anthropology are:

   Archaeology  - The study of how people lived in the past. Archaeologists learn from things people leave behind, like  pottery ,  stone tools , or anything made or used by humans. 
   Physical anthropology  - The study of human  biology , including how people adapt to where they live and how bodies changed over time ( evolution ). Physical anthropologists also study non-human  primate s.
   Language Linguistic  anthropology - The study of how people speak and the words they use and how their language  develop ed ( evolve d). Linguistic anthropology also studies how language changes what people think and how people change language.
   Society Social  or  Culture cultural  anthropology - The study of how people live their lives now and how they may have lived in the past, including the tools they used and the food they obtained and ate. It is also related to  sociology  and social  psychology .

Most people who study anthropology have some schoolwork in all four big kinds of anthropology but later study one or two areas primarily.

  Biological anthropology  
Biological anthropology is sometimes taught as a separate subject, and sometimes as part of the discipline of biology.  Since 1993, the Biological Anthropology Section of the  American Anthropological Association  has awarded the W. W. Howells Book Prize in Biological Anthropology. ref cite web title W. W. Howells Prize  url http://www.aaanet.org/sections/bas/bookprse.html   accessdate 14 March 2013 ref 

   Charles Darwin ,  On the Origin of Species , 1859
   Charles Darwin ,  The Descent of Man , 1871
   Thomas Henry Huxley ,  Man's Place in Nature , 1863
   Rudolf Virchow ,  Anthropological Papers , 1891
   Desmond Morris ,  The Naked Ape , 1967
   Jane Goodall ,  In the Shadow of Man , 1971
   Richard Dawkins ,  The Selfish Gene , 1976
   E.O. Wilson ,  On Human Nature , 1979
   E.O. Wilson ,  Consilience (book) Consilience: the unity of knowledge , 1998
   E.O. Wilson ,  The Social Conquest of Earth , 2012
   Jared Diamond ,  The Third Chimpanzee , 1991
   Jared Diamond ,  Collapse: how societies choose to fail or succeed , 2005
   Helen Fisher (anthropologist) Helen Fisher ,  Anatomy of Love : a natural history of mating, marriage, and why we stray , 1992
   Sarah Blaffer Hrdy ,  Mother Nature: a history of mothers, infants and natural selection , 1999
  Peter J. Richerson and  Robert Boyd (anthropologist) Robert Boyd ,  Not by Genes Alone , 2005
  Michael Tomasello,  Origins of Human Communication , 2008
  Richard Wrangham,  Catching Fire: how cooking made us human , 2009

 File:FranzBoas.jpg thumb|Boas 
 Notable anthropologists 
  Fredrik Barth
   Franz Boas 
   Robert Broom 
   Raymond Dart 
   Mary Douglas 
   Eugene Dubois 
   Zora Neale Hurston 
   Claude Levi-Strauss 
   Ruth Landes 
   Louis Leakey 
   Huang Xianfan 
 Commons category Anthropology 

  References  
 reflist 


 Category:Anthropology  