Ecology

File:Ecologia.jpg thumb|250px| 

 Ecology  is the  science  which studies the  biota , the  environment , and their interactions. It comes from the  Greek language Greek   oikos  = house;  logos  = study. 

Ecology is the study of  ecosystem s. Ecosystems describe the web or network of relations among organisms at different scales of organization. Since ecology refers to any form of  biodiversity , ecologists research everything from tiny  bacteria  in  nutrient   recycling  to the effects of  tropical   rain forest s on the  Earth's atmosphere .  Scientists who study these interactions are called  ecologists . 

 Terrestrial ecoregion  and  climate change  research are two areas where ecologists now focus.

There are many practical applications of ecology in  conservation  biology,  wetland  management,  natural resource  management ( agriculture ,  forestry ,  fishing fisheries ), city  planning  (urban ecology),  community health ,  economics , and applied science. It provides a framework for understanding and researching human social interaction. ref Omerod S.J. Pienkowski M.W. & Watkinson A.R. 1999. Communicating the value of ecology.  Journal of Applied Ecology   36 , 847-855 ref ref Phillipson J. Lowe P. & Bullock J.M. 2009. Navigating the social sciences: interdisciplinarity and ecology.  Journal of Applied Ecology   46 , 261-264 ref ref Steward T.A.  et al.  2008. Beyond urban legends: an emerging framework of urban ecology, as illustrated by the Baltimore Ecosystem Study.  BioScience   58  139-150 ref ref name Aguirre09 cite journal   last Aguirre   first A.A.   title Biodiversity and Human Health   journal EcoHealth   year 2009   doi 10.1007/s10393-009-0242-0 ref 


  Ecology in politics  
Ecology starts many powerful philosophical and political movements - including the conservation movement, wellness movement, environmental movement, and ecology movement we know today. When these are combined with  peace  movements and the Six Principles, they are called  green  movements. In general, these put  ecosystem health  first on a list of human moral and political priorities, as the way to achieve better human health and social harmony, and better  economics . 

People with these beliefs are called political ecologists. Some have organized into the Green Parties, but there are actually political ecologists in most political parties. They very often use arguments from ecology to advance  policy , especially  forest  policy and energy  policy .

Also, ecology means that it is the branch of biology dealing with the relations and interactions between organisms and their environment, including other organisms.

  Ecology includes economics  
Many ecologists also deal with human economics:

   Lynn Margulis  says that economics studies how humans make a living, while ecology studies how every other animal makes a living.
   Mike Nickerson  says that "economy is three-fifths of ecology", since ecosystems create resources and dispose of waste, which the economy assumes is done "for free".

Ecological  economic s and human development theory try to separate the economic questions from others, but it is difficult. Many people think economics is just part of ecology now, and that economics that ignores it is wrong. "Natural  capital (economics) capital " is an example of one  theory  combining both.

  Ecology and anthropology  
Sometimes ecology is compared to  anthropology . Anthropology includes how our bodies and minds are affected by our environment, while ecology includes how our  environment  is affected by our bodies and minds. There is even a type of anthropology called ecological anthropology, which studies how people interact with the environment. 

Antoine de Saint-Exupery stated: "The earth teaches us more about ourselves than all the books. Because it resists us. Man discovers himself when he measures himself against the obstacle".

 Related pages 
 Environmentalism 
 Sustainable development 

  References  
 commonscat Ecology 
 Reflist 

 Category:Ecology  