Idiom

An  idiom  is a  word  or  phrase  which means something different from its literal meaning. Idioms are common phrases or terms whose meaning is changed, but can be understood by their popular use. 

Because idioms can mean something different from what the words mean it is difficult for someone not very good at speaking the language to use them properly. Some idioms are only used by some groups of people or at certain times. The idiom  shape up or ship out , which is like saying  improve your behavior or leave if you don't , might be said by an employer or supervisor to an employee, but not to other people.

Idioms are not the same thing as  slang . Idioms are made of normal words that have a special meaning known to almost everyone. Slang is usually special words, or special meanings of normal words that are known only to a particular group of people.

To learn a language a person needs to learn the words in that language, and how and when to use them. But people also need to learn idioms separately because certain words together or at certain times can have different meanings. In order to understand an idiom, one sometimes needs to know the culture the idiom comes from.

To know the history of an idiom can be useful and interesting, but is not necessary to be able to use the idiom properly. For example, most native British English speakers know that "No room to swing a cat" means "there was not a lot of space" and can use the idiom properly. However, few know this is because 200 years ago sailors were punished by being whipped with a " cat o' nine tails ". A big space was cleared on the ship so that the person doing the whipping had room to  swing the cat .

An idiom is a phrase whose meaning cannot be understood from the dictionary definitions of each word taken separately.

 Some common idioms 
   Break a leg 
  A way to wish someone good luck.
   To live it up 
  To enjoy life, to live widely
   To kick the  bucket 
  To die.
   Shape up or  ship  out 
  Used to tell someone that they should leave if they don't improve their  behavior  or performance
   To shed  crocodile  tears 
  To cry about something but without actually caring.
   Wild  goose  chase 
  A useless journey or pursuit.
   There's no room to swing a cat 
  There is not a lot of space.
   To pay through the nose 
  To pay a lot of money, more than is normal.
   To bark up the wrong tree 
  To choose the wrong course of action.
   To spill the beans 
  To tell a secret.
   It's raining cats and dogs 
  It's raining heavily.
   To get into hot water 
  To get into trouble.
   To be  chicken -hearted 
  To be scared.
   Top dog 
  Leader.
   To smell a rat 
  To think that something is wrong.
   To chicken out 
  Not doing an activity because of  fear .
   To give up 
  To quit.
   To give up on 
  To stop believing in something or someone.
   I could eat a horse 
  To be very hungry.
   To be on top of the world 
 To be really happy.

 Category:Figures of speech