Fish

File:Blue shark.jpg thumb|230px| Blue shark 
 File:Grass carp fexx.jpg thumb|right|230px| Carp 
 File:leafydragon.jpg thumb|230px|Fish come in many shapes and sizes. This is a sea dragon (kira), a close relative of the  seahorse . They are  camouflage d as floating seaweed. ref http://animals.nationalgeographic.com/animals/fish/sea-dragon.html Leafy and Weedy Sea Dragon  National Geographic Profile. Retrieved 20 July 2009. ref ref IUCN2006 assessors Connolly R year 2006 id 17096 title Phycodurus eques downloaded 20 July 2009 ref 
 File:Dunkleosteus skull QM email.jpg thumb|right|230px| Dunkleosteus , a giant armoured arthrodire of the later  Devonian . Up to 6 metres long, it lived in the  Inland sea s of  North America . ref name Long Long J.A. 1995.  The rise of fishes: 500 million years of evolution . Johns Hopkins, Baltimore. ref 

 Fish  (plural: fish or fishes) are  vertebrate s which live in water and  respiration respire  (get  oxygen ) with  gills . They lack  limb s with digits (fingers & toes). This is a  definition  which does not quite work: some  amphibia  also live in water and have external gills, but they are not fishes.  

Fish used to be a  class (biology) class  of  vertebrates .  Now the term covers five classes of aquatic vertebrates:
 Agnatha Jawless fish 
 + Placodermi Armoured fish 
 Chondrichthyes Cartilaginous fish 
 Actinopterygii Ray-finned fish 
 Sarcopterygii Lobe-finned fish 

There are more fish than  tetrapods  (land vertebrates): there are over 33,000 described species of fish. ref FishBase.  http://www.fishbase.org/search.php ref  Fish are usually covered with scales. They have two sets of paired  fins  and several unpaired fins. Most fish are cold-blooded ( poikilotherm ). A fish takes in the  oxygen  from the water using  gills . There are many different kinds of fish. They live in  fresh water  in  lake s and  river s, and in  salt water  in the  ocean . Some fish are less than one  centimeter  long. The largest fish is the  whale shark , which can be almost 15  metre meters  long and weigh 15  ton s. Most fish live in the water. A group of fish called the  lungfish  have developed  lung s because they live in rivers and pools which dry up in certain parts of the year. They burrow into mud and  aestivation aestivate  until the water returns.

'Fish' is a  paraphyletic  term in  cladistics  because it lacks a  monophyletic  group of descendants. It does not include the land vertebrates or  tetrapod s, which descended from fish.

  Fish or fishes?  
Though often used interchangeably, these words have different meanings.  Fish  is used either as singular noun or to describe a group of specimens from a single species.  Fishes  describes a group of different species. ref name Helfman Helfman G.  et al  2009.  http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/helfman/ The diversity of fishes: biology, evolution, and ecology  Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-2494-2 ref 

  Types of fish  
Fish, the oldest vertebrate group, includes a huge range of types, from the Middle  Ordovician , about 490 million years ago, to the present day. These are the main groups: ref name Helfman ref Moyle P.B. and Cech J.J. 2003.  Fishes: an introduction to Ichthyology . 5th ed, Cummings. ISBN 978-0-13-100847-2 ref ref Maisey J.G. 1996.  Discovering fossil fishes . Holt N.Y. ref 

   Agnatha : the jawless fish.  Cambrian  to present day. ref Janvier, Philippe 2010. MicroRNAs revive old views about jawless vertebrate divergence and evolution.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (USA)   107 :19137-19138.  http://www.pnas.org/content/107/45/19137.full.pdf+html ref 
   Pteraspid s: the head-shields
   Anaspid s: gills opened as holes.  Silurian  to end- Devonian .
   Cephalaspid s: early jawless fish
   Lamprey s: living ectoparasites
   Osteostraci : bony-armoured jawless fish.
   Gnathostomata : the jawed fish. Includes all types commonly called fish, except the lamprey.
   Placoderm s: heavily armoured fish
   Chondrichthyes : cartilaginous fish:  shark s,  ray s and  skate s.
   Acanthodii : extinct spiny sharks
   Osteichthyes : bony fish.
   Actinopterygii : the  ray-finned fish .
   Chondrostei :  sturgeon s and some other early types.
   Neopterygii : first seen in the later Permian, lighter and faster-moving than previous groups.
   Holostei : the  gar s and  bowfin s
   Teleost ei: the most successful group,  Triassic  to present day.
   Sarcopterygii : the  lobe-finned fish 
   Dipnoi : the  lungfish ; eight  genera  survive.
   Coelacanth s: two  species  survive. They were probably a  sister-group  to the  tetrapod s.

Certain animals that have the word  fish  in their name are not really fish:  Crayfish  are  crustacean s, and  jellyfish  are  Cnidaria ns. Some animals look like fish, but are not.  Whale s and  dolphin s are  mammal s, for example.

  Anatomy  
 File:Lampanyctodes hectoris (Hector's lanternfish)2.png thumb|center|400px|The anatomy of  Lampanyctodes hectoris   br  1. operculum (gill cover) 2 & 5. lateral line 3. dorsal fin 4 fat fin 6. caudal fin 7. anal fin 8. photophores 9. pelvic fins paired 10. pectoral fins (paired) 

  Bony and cartilagenous fish  
Most kinds of fish have  bone s. Some kinds of fish, such as  shark s and  ray s, do not have real bones (their  skeleton s are made of  cartilage ) they are known as  cartilaginous fish .

  Fish scales  
All fish are covered with overlapping  Scale (zoology) scales , and each major group of fish has its own special type of scale. Teleosts ('modern' fish) have what are called  leptoid  scales. These grow in concentric circles and overlap in a head to tail direction like roof tiles. Sharks and other chondrichthyes have  placoid  scales made of denticles, like small versions of their teeth. These also overlap in a head to tail direction, producing a tough outer layer. Shark skin is available for purchase as  shagreen , a leather which as original is smooth in one direction, and rough in the other direction. It may be polished for use, but is always rough in texture and resistant to slipping.

The scales are usually covered with a layer of  slime  which improves passage through the water, and makes the fish more slippery to a  predator .

  Swimming  
Fish swim by exerting force against the surrounding water. There are exceptions, but this is usually done by the fish contracting muscles on either side of its body in order to generate waves of flexion that travel the length of the body from nose to tail, generally getting larger as they go along. Most fishes generate thrust using lateral movements of their body & tail fin (caudal fin). However, there are also species which move mainly using their median and paired fins. The latter group profits from the gained manoeuvrability that is needed when living in coral reefs for example. But they can not swim as fast as fish using their bodies & caudal fins. ref Breder C.M. 2003. The locomotion of fishes.  Zoologica ,  4 , 159-256, (1926);  Journal of Experimental Biology   206 , 2749-2758 (2003) ref 

  Muscle  
Fish can swim slowly for many hours using red muscle fibres. They also make short, fast bursts using white muscle. The two types of muscle have a fundamentally different  physiology . The red fibres are usually alongside a much greater number of white fibres.

The white fibres get their energy by converting the  carbohydrate   glycogen  to lactate ( lactic acid ). This is  anaerobic metabolism , that is, it does not need  oxygen . They are used for fast, short bursts. Once the lactic acid builds up in the muscles, they stop working, and it takes time for the lactate to be removed, and the glycogen replaced. ref name McN Alexander, R. McNeill. 1974.  Functional design in fishes . London: Hutchinson, p31. ISBN 0-09-104751-X ref  Using their white fibres, fish can reach speeds of 10 lengths per second for short bursts. ref name McN 

Swimming for long periods needs oxygen for the red fibres. The oxygen supply has to be constant because these fibres only operate  aerobic ally. They are red because they have a rich blood supply, and they contain  myoglobin . Myoglobin transports the oxygen to the oxidising systems. Red muscle gets its energy by oxidising  fat , which weight for weight has twice as much energy as carbohydrate or protein. ref name McN  Using their red fibres, fish can keep up a speed of 3 ndash 5 lengths per second for long periods. ref name McN 

  Swimming in groups  
 main Shoaling and schooling 
Many fish swim in groups.  Schools of fish can swim together for long distances, and may be chased by predators which also swim in schools. Casual groups are called 'shoals'.

  Body shape  
The shape of the body of a fish is important to its swimming. This is because  wikt:streamline streamlined  body shapes makes the water drag less. Here are some common fish shapes.

  Streamlining  
 File:White shark.jpg thumb|230px|right|alt=A smooth, rocket-shaped shark swims quickly through the water.|The rocket-shape of this shark makes it an efficient swimmer. It is fast over short distances. 

The picture on the right shows a  shark . This shark's shape is called  fusiform , and it is an ovoid shape where both ends of the fish are pointy. This is the best shape for going through water quickly. ref Nielsen, Knut Schmidt 1984.  Scaling: why is animal size so important?  Cambridge. Chapter 15 ref ref Baily, Jill 1997.  How fish swim . Benchmark, N.Y. ref  Fishes with fusiform shapes can chase prey and escape predators quickly. Many live in the open ocean and swim constantly, like  marlin s,  swordfish , and  tuna .  Ichthyosaur s,  porpoise s,  dolphin s,  killer whale s all have similar shapes. This is an example of  convergent evolution .

  Eel-like  
The long, ribbon-like shape of an  eel 's body shows another shape.  This enables them to hide in cracks, springing out quickly to capture prey, then returning quickly to their hiding spot.

  Flatfish  
 File:Flounder hawaii.jpg thumb|230px|alt=a depressed flounder.|An adult flounder has both eyes on the upper side of its body. 
 Flatfish  live on the bottom of the ocean or lake. Most use  camouflage : they change colors to match the ocean floor.

  Compressed  
Fish with compressed shapes have flat, vertical bodies, with one eye on each side. They swim upright and can be very thin. They usually live in  reef s where their flat bodies can slip in and out among the  coral s,  sponge s, and rocks, keeping hidden from predators.  Marine angelfish Angelfish ,  surgeonfish , and  butterflyfish  are all compressed fish.

  Fish as food  
People eat many kinds of fish.  The fish that people eat most include  carp ,  cod ,  herring ,  perch ,  sardine s,  sturgeon ,  tilapia ,  trout ,  tuna , and many others.  A person who buys and sells fish for eating is called a  fishmonger .

The word  to fish  is also used for the activity of catching fish.  People catch fish with small  Fishing net nets  from the side of the water or from small  boat s, or with big  Fishing net nets  from big boats.  People can also catch fish with  fishing pole s and fishhooks with  bait .  This is often called  angling .  Anglers also different types of  fishing lure s.  

 Further Fishing 

  Fish as pets  
Some people keep fish as  pet s.  Goldfish  and  Siamese Fighting Fish  are popular types of pet fish.  Koi  and other ornamental fish are often kept by groups of people in public ponds for their beauty and calming nature.

  References  
 Reflist 

  Related pages  
   http://en.citizendium.org/wiki/Fish Fish  -Citizendium 

 commonscat Fish 

 vertebrates 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Fish *