Calculus

unsourced date September 2009 
 Calculus  is a branch of  mathematics  which helps us understand changes between values that are related by a  Function (mathematics) function . For example, if you had one formula telling how much money you got every day, calculus would help you understand related formulas like how much money you have in total, and whether you are getting more money or less than you used to.   All these formulas are   function (mathematics) functions  of time, and so that is one way to think of calculus--studying functions of time. There are two different types of calculus.  Differential calculus  divides things into small ( different ) pieces and tells us how they change from one moment to the next, while  integral calculus  joins ( integrates ) the small pieces together and tells us how much of something is made, overall, by a series of changes. Calculus is used in many different areas of study such as  physics ,  astronomy ,  biology ,  engineering ,  economics ,  medicine  and  sociology .

 History 
In the 1670s and 1680s, Sir  Isaac Newton  in England and  Gottfried Leibniz  in Germany figured out calculus at the same time, working separately from each other. Newton wanted to have a new way to predict where to see  planet s in the sky, because  astronomy  had always been a popular and useful form of science, and knowing more about the motions of the objects in the night sky was important for  navigation  of ships. Leibniz wanted to measure the space (area) under a  curve  (a line which is not straight). Many years later, the two men argued over who discovered it first. Scientists from England supported Newton, but scientists from the rest of Europe supported Leibniz. Most  mathematician s today agree that both men share the credit equally. Some parts of modern calculus come from Newton, such as its uses in  physics . Other parts come from Leibniz, such as the symbols used to write it.

They were not the first people to use mathematics to describe the physical world-- Aristotle  and  Pythagoras  came earlier, and so did  Galileo Galilei Galileo , who said that mathematics was the language of science. But they were the first to design a system that describes how things change over time and can predict how they will change in the future.

The name "calculus" was the  Latin language Latin  word for a small stone the ancient  Roman Empire Roman s used in counting and  gambling . The English word "calculate" comes from the same Latin word.

 Differential calculus 
 main Differential calculus 

 Differential calculus  is the process of finding out the rate of change of a  variable  compared to another variable. It can be used to find the speed of a moving object or the slope of a curve, figure out the maximum or minimum points of a curve, or find answers to problems in the  electricity  and  magnetism  areas of physics, among many other uses.

Many amounts can be variables, which can change their value unlike numbers such as 5 or 200. Some examples of variables are  distance  and  time . The  speed  of an object is how far it travels in a particular time. So if a town is 80 kilometres (50 miles) away and a person in a car gets there in one hour, they have traveled at an average speed of 80 kilometres (50 miles) per hour. But this is only an  average --they may have been traveling faster at some times (on a highway) and slower at others (at a traffic light or on a small street where people live). Imagine a driver trying to figure out a car's speed using only its odometer (distance meter) and clock, without a speedometer!

Until calculus was invented, the only way to work this out was to cut the time into smaller and smaller pieces, so the average speed over the smaller time would get closer and closer to the actual speed at a point in time. This was a very long and hard process and had to be done each time people wanted to work something out.

 File:Simple curve showing tangents.svg thumb|right|On a curve, two different points have different slopes. The red and blue lines are  Trigonometric function tangent s to the curve. 

A very similar problem is to find the  wikt:slope slope  (how steep it is) at any point on a  curve . The slope of a  straight  line is easy to work out--it is simply how much it goes up ( y  or  wikt:vertical vertical ) divided by how much it goes across ( x  or  wikt:horizontal horizontal ). On a  curve , though, the slope is a variable (has different values at different points) because the line bends. But if the curve was to be cut into very, very small pieces, the curve at the point would look almost like a very short straight line. So to work out its slope, a straight line can be drawn through the point with the same slope as the curve at that point. If it is done exactly right, the straight line will have the same slope as the curve, and is called a  Trigonometric function tangent . But there is no way to know (without very complicated mathematics) whether the tangent is exactly right, and our eyes are not accurate enough to be certain whether it is exact or simply very close.

What Newton and Leibniz found was a way to work out the slope (or the speed in the distance example) exactly using simple and logical rules. They divided the curve into an  infinity infinite  number of very small pieces. They then chose points on either side of the range they were interested in and worked out tangents at each. As the points moved closer together towards the point they were interested in, the slope  approached  a particular value as the tangents approached the real slope of the curve. They said that this particular value it approached was the actual slope.

 File:First principles differentiation demo.svg thumb|220px|A picture that shows what  x  and  x + h  mean on the curve. 

Let's say we have a function  y  = f( x ). f is short for  function (mathematics) function , so this equation means "y is a function of x". This tells us that how high y is on the  vertical  axis depends on what x (the  horizontal  axis) is at that time. For example, with the equation  y  =  x 2, we know that if  x  is 1, then  y  will be 1; if  x  is 3, then  y  will be 9; if  x  is 20, then  y  will be 400.

 math \lim_{h\rightarrow0} \frac{f(x+h) - f(x)}{h} math 

If we use y = x2, the  derivative  produced  Differential calculus#How it works using this method  is 2 x , or 2 multiplied by  x . So we know without having to draw any tangent lines that at any point on the curve  f(x)  =  x 2, the  derivative   f small small ( x ) (marked with the  Prime (symbol) prime symbol ) will be 2 x  at any point. This process of working out a slope using limits is called  differentiation , or finding the derivative.

Leibniz came to the same result, but called h "dx", which means "with respect to x". He called the resulting change in f(x) "dy", which means "a tiny amount of y". Leibniz's notation is used by more books because it is easy to understand when the equations become more complicated. In Leibniz notation:

 math \frac{dy}{dx} = f'(x) math 

Mathematicians have grown this basic theory to make simple  algebra  rules which can be used to find the derivative of almost any function.

 Main idea of calculus 
The main idea in calculus is called the  fundamental theorem of calculus . This main idea says that the two calculus processes, differential and integral calculus, are opposites. That is, a person can use differential calculus to undo an integral calculus process. Also, a person can use integral calculus to undo a differential calculus method. This is just like using division to "undo" multiplication, or addition to "undo" subtraction.

In a single sentence, the fundamental theorem runs something like this: "The derivative of the integral of a function  f  is the function itself".

 Demonstration of main idea of calculus 
 How to use integral calculus to find areas 
 File:Integral as region under curve.svg right|thumb|280px|Integration can be thought of as a way of finding the area under a curve. 
 File:Riemann sum (middlebox).gif right|thumb|280px|We can approximate the area under a curve by adding up the areas of many rectangles underneath the curve. The more rectangles we use, the better our approximation. 
The method integral calculus uses to find areas of shapes is to break the shape up into many small boxes, and add up the area of each of the boxes. This gives an approximation to the area.  If the boxes are made narrower and narrower, then there are more and more of them, and the area of all the boxes becomes very close to the area of the shape.  One of the main ideas of calculus is that we can imagine having an infinite number of these boxes, each infinitely narrow, and then we would have the exact area of the shape.

 Other uses of calculus 
Calculus is used to describe things that  wikt:change change , like things in  nature . It can be used for showing and learning all of these:

 How  wave (physics) wave s move. Waves are very important in the  natural  world. For example,  sound  and  light  can be thought of as waves.
 Where  heat  moves, like in a house. This is useful for  architecture  (building houses), so that the house can be as cheap to heat as possible.
 How very small things like  atoms  act.
 How fast something will  falling fall , also known as  gravity .
 How  machine s work, also known as  mechanics .
 The  orbit path  of the  moon  as it moves around the  earth . Also, the path of the earth as it moves around the  sun , and any  planet  or  moon  moving around anything in  Outer space space .

 Category:Calculus  