Farming

File:Maler_der_Grabkammer_des_Sennudem_001.jpg thumb|250px|Farming in  Ancient Egypt File:Grand-Reng_JPG01.jpg thumb|250px| Flax 

 Farming  is growing  crop s or keeping animals by people for  food  and  raw material s. Farming is a part of  agriculture .

  History  
Agriculture started thousands of years ago, but no one knows for sure how old it is. ref Colin Tudge argues "from at least 40,000 years ago... people were managing their environment to such an extent that they can properly be called 'proto-farmers'". Tudge, Colin 1998.  Neanderthals, bandits and farmers: how agriculture really began . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, p3. ISBN 0-297-84258-7 ref  The development of farming gave rise to the  Neolithic Revolution  whereby people gave up  nomad ic  hunting  and settled in what became  cities .

Agriculture and  domestication  probably started in the  Fertile Crescent  (the  Nile  Valley, The  Levant  and  Mesopotamia ). ref Harris, David (ed) 1996.  The origins and spread of agriculture and pastoralism in  Eurasia : crops, fields, flocks and herds . University College London Press. ISBN 1-56098-675-1 ref  The area called Fertile Crescent is now in the countries of  Iraq ,  Syria ,  Turkey ,  Jordan ,  Lebanon ,  Israel , and  Egypt .  Wheat  and  barley  are some of the first crops people grew. People probably started agriculture slowly by planting a few crops, but still gathered many foods from the wild. People may have started farming because the weather and soil began to change. Farming can feed many more people than  hunter-gatherer s can feed on the same amount of land.

  Kinds of farming  
Agriculture is not only growing food for people and animals, but also growing other things like  flower s and  nursery   plant s, manure or dung,  animal hides  (skins or furs),  leather , animals, fungi,  fiber s ( cotton ,  wool ,  hemp , and  flax ),  biofuel s , and  drug s (bio pharmaceuticals ,  marijuana ,  opium ).

Many people still live by  subsistence agriculture , on a small farm.  They can only grow enough food to feed the farmer, his family, and his animals.  Extra food or animals are sold for money or other things the farmer cannot grow. The  yield  is the amount of food grown on a given amount of land, and it is often low. This is because subsistence farmers are generally less  education educated , and they have less  money  to buy equipment.  Drought  and other problems sometimes cause  famine s. Where yields are low,  forests  are sometimes cut to provide new land to grow more food. This is good in the short term, but can be bad for the country and the surrounding  environment  over many years.

In rich countries, farms are often much larger. The amount produced on farms has got bigger in the last one hundred years because farmers are able to grow better  variety (botany) varieties  of plants, use more fertilizer, use more water, and more easily control weeds and pests. Many farms also use machines, which cut down on the number of people needed to farm the land. There are fewer farmers in rich countries, but the farmers are able to grow more. 

This kind of  intensive agriculture  comes with its own set of problems. Farmers use a lot of chemical fertilizers,  pesticide s (chemicals that kill bugs), and  herbicide s (chemicals that kill weeds). These chemicals can  pollute  the  soil  or the water. They can also create bugs and weeds that are more resistant to the chemicals, causing outbreaks of these pests. The soil can be damaged by  erosion  (blowing or washing away), salt buildup, or loss of structure.  Irrigation  (adding water from rivers) can pollute water and lower the water table. These problems have all got solutions, and modern young farmers usually have a good technical education.

  Agriculture techniques  
   Fertilizer s
   Crop rotation 
   Weed  removal
   Breeding 
   Agricultural fencing Fencing 
   Ranching 

Farmers select plants with better yield, taste, and  nutrition al value.  They also choose plants that can survive  plant disease  and drought, and are easier to harvest.  Centuries of  artificial selection  and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics of crop plants. The crops produce better yield with other techniques (use of fertilizers, chemical pest control, irrigation).

Some companies have been searching for new plants in poor countries, and genetically modify these plants to improve them. They then try to patent the seeds and sell them back to the poor countries.

New plants were created with  genetic engineering . One example of  genetic engineering  is modifying a plant to resist a herbicide.

  Food  
It is important for there to be enough food for everyone. The food must also be safe and good. People say it is not always safe, because it contains some chemicals. Other people say intensive agriculture is damaging the environment. For this reason, there are several types of agriculture.
  Traditional agriculture is mostly done in poor countries.
  Intensive agriculture is mostly done in countries with more money. It uses pesticides, machinery, chemical fertilizers. 
  Organic farming is using only natural products such as compost and green manure. 
  Integrated farming is using local resources, and trying to use the waste from one process as a resource in another process.

 Agricultural policy  focuses on the goals and methods of agricultural production. At the policy level, common goals of agriculture include:

   Food safety : to be sure that the food supply is safe.
   Food security : to be sure there is enough food for everyone.
   Food quality : to be sure the food is of good quality.

  Problems in agriculture  
There are some serious problems that people face trying to grow food today.
These include:
   Erosion 
   Diseases 
   Pests 
   Weed s
   Drought 
   Rainfall 

  Crops  
The major crops produced in the world in 2002, are maize (corn), wheat, rice, and cotton.

 Maize  624 millions of metric tons
 Wheat  570 millions of metric tons
 Rice  381.1 millions of metric tons
 Cotton  96.5 millions of metric tons

 See also :  List of vegetables ,  List of herbs ,  List of fruit 

  Related pages  
 Commons category Agriculture Farming 
   Aquaculture 
   Bee keeping 
   Animal husbandry 

  References  
 reflist 

 Category:Agriculture  