Army

File:Army.afnews.jpg thumb|Soldiers in an army. 
The  army  is the part of a  country country's   military  that fights on the ground. People in the army are called  soldier s. Many modern armies have  vehicle s such as  tank s,  airplane s, and  helicopter s to help soldiers fight on the ground.

A soldier may be a volunteer (someone who joins something because they want to), or he may be forced by the government to join the army.  Forcing men to join the army is called  conscription  or  draft . Voluntary armies tend to be small by numbers, but high in confidence and quality. Drafted armies are large, but often lacking in confidence and in quality: it may be very difficult to force someone to risk his life against his will. Sometimes an army is made up from  mercenary mercenaries , who fight just for pay and have little loyalty to the country which they serve.

Soldiers do many things, from shooting enemies, to digging defensive  trench es.  They are used to defend their country, or attack another country's army. It is difficult, and soldiers must be in good shape, both  Physical fitness physically  and mentally. They almost always move together, and that way the team can do more things, in a safer way. They may be assigned to certain places to guard, or they may be told to search a place, or even attack it. That is up to their  commander . Every soldier answers to someone else, so that way, everything is organized.

Sometimes, when a country's army is busy in different places, and there are not enough soldiers to do more, a country can hire  civilian s to do some of the army's jobs, like protecting buildings and important people and groups of trucks travelling from one place to another.  Usually, they hire  veteran s who were members of the  military  before leaving and working elsewhere.

Working in the army and wearing the uniform is called  service . A soldier will never say "I work as a Sergeant in the signal corps" but always "I  serve  as a Sergeant in the signal corps", or other rank, specialty and unit. Only civilian workers who do not wear uniform speak about "working" in the army.

  Discipline  
The function of the army is based on  discipline . That means that every soldier will unquestionably carry out the orders which he or she has received and will obey his or her superior  officer  or  NCO non-commissioned officer . There is only one exception: orders which violate the human rights or international law must not be obeyed as it is considered a war crime. The chain of command is expressed by the  military rank  system and hierarchy.

  Gear  
A soldier is supplied with weapons, such as  gun s,  knife knives , and other simple gear for surviving in the battlefield, such as  food ,  water ,  clothing clothes , and  tent s. They must keep good care of the items. Some soldiers train to be a doctor for the army, or other civilian duties.

  Qualifications  
Before a soldier joins the army, he must qualify to be in it first. The person is put through tests, so that the army will know if the recruit can do it or not. This is sometimes called 'boot camp'. He must complete mental tests, and physical tests. It depends on where he is testing that will tell him how hard it will be. He will also take tests to determine what job he will do in the military. For instance, he may work with computers and be a member of the  signal corps  or be a  cook  for the soldiers, he may have been a construction worker in civilian life and be a  military engineer , he may become a  truck driver  and serve in  logistics , or he may be very good with a rifle and be a  sniper  in the  infantry . There are a lot of jobs that a person can choose to do in the army.

  Branches  
There are traditionally six branches of service in the army:

 Infantry , foot soldiers who fight with rifles and other light weapons
 Cavalry ,  mounted soldiers. Today  tank  has replaced  horse s and cavalrymen are called tankers.
 Artillery , soldiers who operate cannons, howitzers and mortars. They provide fire support for infantry.
 Military engineer s, soldiers who build things and demolish (blow up) things and handle  explosive s. 
 Signal corps , soldiers who operate communications, radios, radars, signaling and computers. 
 Logistics , which carry supplies ( food ,  fuel ,  ammunition ,  medicine s etc.) to other branches and replenish them.

  Related pages  
   Air Force , the part of the  military  which operate  airplane s to bomb or dogfight.
   Navy , the part of the  military  which fights with  warship s on the sea.
   Marine (military) Marines , the part of the  military  that fights in air, land, and sea.

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Army  