Crime

File:Peinture Palais de Justice de Toulouse.jpg thumb|alt=darkly shaded painting of two winged angels chasing a man who runs away from a fallen, naked man attacked and subdued for his clothing| Justice  and  Divine   Vengeance (concept) Vengeance  in pursuit of Crime- 1808 oil-on-canvas by  Pierre-Paul Prud'hon 

A  crime  (or  misdemeanor  or  felony ) is an act done by a  person  which is against the  law s of a  country  or region. A person who does this is called a  criminal .

The basic idea of what things are called "crimes" is that they are thought to be things that might cause a problem for another person. Things like  kill ing another person,  injury injuring  another person, or  steal ing from another person are crimes in most countries. Also, it can be a crime to have or sell  contraband  such as  Gun control guns  or  illegal drug s. 

When some criminals make money from crime, they try to stop the  police  finding out where the money came from by  money laundering .

  Levels of crime  
There are various levels of crimes. In some  jurisdiction s they are:
   misdemeanor  - a minor crime, typically punished by a fee or less than 1 year in  jail .
   felony  (or  high crime ) - a major crime, typically punished by 1 year or longer in  prison .

Different countries have different ideas of what things are crimes, and which ones are the worst.  Some things that are crimes in one country are not crimes in other countries.  Many countries get their ideas of what things are crimes from  religion s or controversial events which cause a law to be quickly created. For example, a religion might consider eating a particular food to be a crime.  When  automobile s became numerous, they killed or hurt many people in  road accident s, so new laws were made for them.

In many countries, if people say they made or wrote a  book ,  movie ,  song , or  Web page  that they did not really make or write, it is a crime against  copyright  laws. In many countries, helping to grow, make, move, or sell  illegal drug s is a crime. 

In most countries,  police  try to stop crimes and to find criminals. When the police find someone who they think might be a criminal, they usually hold the person in a  jail . Then, usually, a  court  or a  judge  decides if the person really did a crime. If the court or judge decides that the person really did it, then he or she might have to pay a  fine  or go to  prison . Sometimes the judge might decide that the criminal should be  execute d (killed). This is called  Capital punishment  (or the  Death Penalty ). There are countries in the world who execute criminals, and others who do not.

 wikt 


 stub 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Crime  