Seed

File:Brown Flax Seeds.jpg thumb|240px| Flax  seeds 
A  seed  is the part of a  seed plant  which can grow into a new plant. It is a  reproduction reproductive  structure which disperses, ref spreads away from the parent plant ref  and can survive for some time. A typical seed includes three basic parts: (1) an  embryo , (2) a supply of  nutrient s for the embryo, and (3) a seed coat.

There are many different kinds of seeds. Some plants make a lot of seeds, some make only a few. Seeds are often hard and very small, but some are larger. The  coconut  is as big as a  child 's  head , but it contains  no  more than just a seed. At the start, seeds are  dormant  (resting inside their coat) for a while. When the seed is ready to develop, it needs water, air and warmth  but not sunlight  to become a  seedling .

Seeds carry the  food  that helps the new plant begin to grow. This food store is in the  endosperm , and/or in the  cotyledon s. Many kinds of seeds are good food for  animals  and  wikt:people people . The many kinds of  grain  that people grow, such as  rice ,  wheat , and  maize , are all seeds. Seeds are often inside  fruit s.

  Development from the seed  
A seed, though not active, is a tiny living thing. It contains the embryo of the future plant, which is not changing or developing: it is  dormant . The common idea is that the seed "sleeps" until it gets what it needs to wake up. That is not correct. Different seeds have different habits, no doubt adapted to their  habitat . There are different kinds of resting stages in seeds: ref name Baskin, C.C 1998 Baskin C.C. & Baskin J.M. 1998.  Seeds: ecology, biogeography, and evolution of dormancy and germination . Academic Press,  San Diego . ref 
 1. Seed  dormancy : means the seed does not develop for a while  even when conditions are suitable . ref name Fenner Fenner, Michael and Thompson, Ken 2005.  The ecology of seeds . Cambridge. ISBN 9780521653688 ref sup p98 sup  Delayed  germination  (development) allows time for dispersal. Changes take place inside the seed which sooner or later make it germinate. The details vary hugely between  species .
 2. Seed  hibernation : fails to germinate because conditions are not right. Growth is  wikt:trigger triggered  by particular events in the  environment . Details of the triggers are known for some, but not all, seeds.  Rain ,  fire , ground  temperature , are examples. Many seeds only germinate after they have been  eaten  and passed through the  digestive system  of an animal. This also is a dispersal method.

When a seed germinates ("wakes up"), it begins to grow into a little plant called a  seedling . ref name Baskin, C.C 1998  It uses the soft fleshy  material  inside the seed for nutrients (food) until it is ready to make food on its own using sunlight, water and air.

Most seeds germinate underground where there is no sunlight. The plant does not need the nutrients in soil for a few days or weeks, because the seed has all the things it needs to grow. ref name Fenner  Later, though, it will begin to need sunlight. If there is sunlight, the plant will use it to grow healthy. If there is no light, the plant will still grow for a while, but its  plastid s will not mature: the chlorophyll does not turn green. If the plant does not get enough light, it will eventually die. It needs light to make food for itself when the reserve in the seed runs out. ref name Baskin, C.C 1998 

  The oldest  Radiocarbon dating carbon 14 -dated seed that has grown into a plant was a Judean  date palm  seed about 2,000 years old, recovered from excavations at  Agrippa I Herod the Great 's palace on  Masada  in  Israel . It was germinated in 2005. ref Roach, John. 2005.  http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2005/11/1122_051122_old_seed.html 2,000-Year-Old Seed sprouts, sapling is thriving ,  National Geographic News . ref 

  The largest seed is produced by the  Coco de mer , or "double coconut palm",  Lodoicea maldivica .  The entire fruit may weigh up to 23 kilograms (50 pounds) and usually contains a single seed. ref cite book  title The natural history of Palms  author Corner EJH  year 1966  publisher University of California Press  location Berkeley, CA  pages 313-4  ref 

  Origin and evolution  
Seeds have been an important development in the  wikt:reproduction reproduction  and spread of  conifer s and  flowering plants . Plants such as  moss es,  liverwort s and  fern s do not have seeds, and use unprotected  spore s and other methods to  wikt:propagation propagate  themselves. Before the upper  Devonian  period, land plants, like modern ferns, reproduced by sending spores into the air. The spores would land and become new plants only in favourable conditions. Spores have little food stored, and may be just single cells rather than embryos. 

The evolution of seeds changed the plant  life cycle  by freeing plants from the need for external water for  sexual reproduction , and by providing protection and nutrients for the developing embryo. These functions allowed plants to expand beyond the immediate neighbourhood of water sources. They were able to exploit environments which were drier and more upland. ref name Willis Willis K.J. and McElwain J.C. 2002.  The evolution of plants . Oxford. ref sup p92 sup  This can be seen by the success of seed plants in important biological  Ecological niche niche s on land, from  forest s to  grassland s both in hot and cold  climate s. The present-day seed plants are the  Gymnosperm s, with naked seeds, and the  Angiosperm s with covered seeds, usually fruits.

The first true seeds are from the upper Devonian 370-354 million years ago, which is probably the theatre of their first  evolution ary radiation. The earliest seed-producing  tree s were in the forests of the  Carboniferous  period. ref name Willis sup p112 sup  The seed plants steadily became one of the most important elements of nearly all  ecosystem s.

 References 
 reflist 

 commons 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Plant anatomy