Carnivore

For animals of the  mammal  order, see  Carnivora . 

 File:Canis lupus pack surrounding Bison.jpg thumb| Wolf Wolves  hunting a  bison . 

A  carnivore  is an  animal  which eats mostly  meat .  ref The word Carnivora comes from  Latin , where  carne  means "flesh" or "meat", and  vorare  is a  verb  meaning "eat", that is "meat-eater". ref   Predator s commonly  hunt  and kill their own prey.  Scavengers  are carnivores which eat animals they did not kill themselves. Carnivores which eat mainly or only  insect s are called  insectivore s. Carnivores which eat mainly or only  fish  are called  piscivores .

The word "carnivore" describes more than just the scientific order  Carnivora . However, almost all animals in the Carnivora do eat meat, though a few do not. ref Ullrey, Duane E. Nutrient requirements: carnivores.  Encyclopedia of Animal Science . ref 

  List of living carnivores  
 File:Emperor penguins.jpg thumb|right|Unlike tigers,  Penguin s don't need teeth and claws to be carnivores. They feed on crustaceans, fish, squid, and other small marine life. 
 File:Heron with snake.JPG 200px|thumb|Great Blue  Heron  with a  snake 
 Mammals
  All  Feliformia feliforms , such as domestic cats, big cats, hyenas, mongooses,  Viverridae civets 
  Almost all  Caniformia caniforms , such as the dogs, wolves, foxes, ferrets, seals and walruses
  All  cetacea ns, such as dolphins, whales and porpoises
  All  bat s except fruitbats
  The  Dasyuromorphia carnivorous marsupials , such as the  Tasmanian devil 

 Birds
  All  Bird of prey birds of prey , such as hawks, eagles, falcons and owls
  All  vulture s, both old world and new
  Most  waterfowl , such as gulls, penguins, pelicans, storks, and herons

 Reptiles
  All  crocodilia ns, such as alligators, crocodiles, gharials and caimans
  All  snake s, such as cobras, vipers, pythons and boas
  Some  lizard s, such as most skinks and all  monitor lizard s
  Some  turtle s, including the snapping turtle and most sea turtles

 Fish and amphibians
  All  frog s and  toad s
  Almost all  shark s, such as tiger, great white, nurse and reef sharks
  Most  teleost s, such as tuna, marlin, salmon, and bass

 Invertebrates
  Most  crustaceans , such as the  coconut crab  are mainly omnivorous, but eat some prey and carrion
  Many  mollusc s, such as octopus and squid, and some  gastropod s
  All  arachnid s, such as spiders and scorpions
  Many  insect s, such as mantises, dragonflies and most wasps
  All  jellyfish  and  sea star s

  Related pages  
   Theropod 
   Insectivore 
   Herbivore 
   Omnivore 

  References  
 Reflist 

 Category:Carnivores   

