Death

redirect Die the game-playing objects Dice death metal band Death (band) 
 File:SkullFromTheFront.JPG thumb|upright|The human  skull  is often used as a  symbol  for death 
 Death  is the end of  life  in an  organism . All  Biology biological  and living activity of the living thing stop, including the  mind  and the  sensory system sense s. The usual  Signs and symptoms signal  for death is that the  heart  stops beating and cannot be restarted. This can be caused by many things. All living things have a limited lifespan, and all living things eventually die.

Living things which have died are normally described as being  dead . Death of  humans  is often investigated for the cause, in case of  crime  (such as  murder ) or  disease  that may continue to kill other humans. About 150,000 people die every day around the world. ref name degrey cite journal   last   Aubrey D.N.J   first   de Grey   authorlink     title   Life span extension research and public debate: societal considerations   journal   Studies in Ethics, Law, and Technology   volume   1   issue   1, Article 5   year   2007   url    http://www.mfoundation.org/files/sens/ENHANCE-PP.pdf    format   PDF   doi   10.2202/1941-6008.1011   accessdate   March 20, 2009 ref  About two thirds of these people die because of  ageing age . ref name degrey  In addition to the physical body, some believe humans also have a  soul  and believe that the soul can continue without a body ( afterlife ), move into another body ( reincarnation ), or cease to exist ( annihilationism ).  Religion s have different beliefs about this issue. Many cultures have their own  custom s and  ritual s to respect the dead.

When people talk about things or events that lead to the death of a plant or animal, those things or events are usually described as being deadly, or fatal. In the case of diseases, they are described as  terminal . Humans are no different from any other lifeform. Our bodies have an ability for self-repair, but that ability is limited. Finding the cause of death is a medical speciality called  pathology . In  medicine , death is when the heart stops beating for more than several minutes. There are special times in which people recover even though the heart has stopped for 30 minutes, such as near-drowning in very cold water. If machines are used to help the heart and lungs work, then the moment of death is more difficult to know.

  Society and culture  
 File:Placid death.JPG thumb|Dead bodies can be  Mummification mummified  either naturally or by intention. 
Death is commonly a sad or unpleasant thing to people. It can make people think about their own death. People might miss the person who has died. They might also be sad for the family and friends of the person who has died.

In any society, human death is surrounded by  ritual  - a  Funeral wake  or  funeral  is normal.  In some places it was common to  eat  the dead in a form of  ritual   cannibalism .  But this is no longer common, in part because  disease  like  Kuru (disease) kuru  can be passed this way. Human dead bodies are  taboo  in most societies and must be handled in special ways - for a combination of religious and  hygiene  reasons.  A human dead body must always be reported in  law , to be sure it is disposed of properly.

  Dealing with dead bodies and their property  

Finding the cause of any human death and stopping a similar death from happening to someone else are the main reasons people look into  human morbidity  or let dead bodies be cut open and looked at in an  autopsy .  Some religions do not allow autopsies, because they feel the body is holy. Autopsies are usually required by the  state  if someone dies and people do not know why. The autopsy helps find out if someone killed the person on purpose, tried to hurt them, or if they died from a sickness.

To prepare for their own death, humans can write a  last will and testament  to be clear about who gets their  property .  A person will sometimes also volunteer to be an  organ donor . This might mean giving the whole body to  medical research .  It can also save the lives of others by making  organ transplant s possible.

  Religious views of death  

For a long time, many people have been afraid of death and a lot of people have wondered about what may happen to people after they die.  This is one of the largest questions of  philosophy  and  religion . Many people believe there is some form of  afterlife .

Ancient rulers sometimes did insist not only that their own bodies, and much property, but even their servants and relatives be destroyed at their funeral.  In  India  this ritual still does sometimes occur.  Old women sometimes carry guns in case their husband's relatives come to throw them on the funeral fire.

 Christianity  has a special focus on death because of the state killing of  Jesus Christ  by the  Romans .  In  Islam  this is thought to demonstrate the injustice of human systems of dealing out death, and the ability of the best people to overcome it and even forgive it.  In  Christianity  itself it is thought to prove that Jesus himself was really  God  and so could lose his body and still have the power of  resurrection . ref See  Gospel of John  10:38 ref  In  Buddhism   reincarnation  is believed to occur. Reincarnation is an idea taken from  Hinduism .

 Confucianism  advises respect for parents and forms of  ancestor   worship  to respect both dead and living ancestors.

  Rituals surrounding death  

Every  ethical tradition  including the medical view of the body has some ritual surrounding death.  Often these excuse behaviours that might be hated if they did not have the ritual.  For instance, one may say that  organ transplant  is like  cannibalism .

Very much of what happens at a human death is ritual.  People who wish theirs to be dealt with a certain way, and who wish a particular treatment like  cremation  of their body, should decide in advance and set up the necessary payments and agreements.  This makes it much easier for their family after they die, since there is no longer the ability to clearly communicate the wish.

For the same reason, saying goodbye is important.  Most of the  wikt:stress stress  of death seems to come for loved ones who "did not have a chance to say goodbye".

Maybe it is to relieve this stress that rituals are created, and to bring together those that knew someone so that the personal experience a person can no longer communicate for themselves, can be exchanged by others.

Some ritual, such as seances, claim to allow people to speak to the dead. This is not claimed to be very reliable, both by  scientists  and even by those who do them very often.

  Preparing for death  

Aside from wills, goodbyes, organ donations and funerals, there is important personal experience to decide to pass on, or not, when someone knows they may soon die.  Palliative care focuses on basic decisions people make when they are very close to the end of their lives, and it ensures someone is always available to talk to them.  It is a replacement for heroic medical intervention that may keep them physically alive but with no  quality of life .  Human  psychology  must prepare for death if it is anything other than a quick surprise:

 Elizabeth Kubler-Ross  wrote that there were several stages in  dying , of which denial was the first, and acceptance was the last.  Recording one's life is often something people with acceptance will do to leave a  memoir  or a full  autobiography :

Because events leave  living memory , and may only be part of  oral tradition , there are projects to record everything that people remember about  World War I  and the  Shoah .  The first of these was to record everything remembered about the  U.S. Civil War .  This discipline has changed  history  since we have so many more  first person account s of the times, and made  social history  much more standard.

  Other terms for death  
There are other  term s for death. Examples are, "to pass away", "to go to a better place", "to buy the farm" (generally used in the  military ), "to leave the earth", and "to kick the bucket". the term  gone  may also be a term for describing death.  for example : if a person has died, they are also said to be  gone , as in  gone to a better place  or  no longer here .

  References  
 reflist 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Death  