Roman Empire

File:Map of the Roman Empire at its height.svg thumb|250px|Rome when it was biggest (about 117 A.D.) 
 File:Roman Republic Empire map.gif thumb|200px|The Roman Empire at different times. 

The  Roman Empire  ( Latin language Latin :  imperium romanum ) was the largest  empire   of the ancient world. Its capital was  Rome , and its empire was based on the  Mediterranean . The Empire dates from 27 BC, when  Octavian  became the Emperor, Augustus.

The empire was the third stage of  Ancient Rome .  Rome  was first ruled by  Roman Kingdom Roman kings , then by the  Roman Republic , then by an emperor.

Many modern lands were once part of the Roman Empire, including  Roman Britain Britain  (not  Scotland ),  Spain ,  Portugal ,  Gaul France ,  Italy ,  Greece ,  Turkey ,  Germany ,  Egypt ,  The Levant Levant ,  Crimea , and the north coast of  Africa . The main language of the Roman Empire was  Latin ;  Ancient Greek language Greek  was an important secondary language.

The western part of the Roman Empire continued for about 500 years, and the eastern part, including  Greece  and  Anatolia , continued for about a thousand years more. The eastern part was called the  Byzantine Empire , its capital being  Constantinople .

  Governing the Empire  
In order to control their large empire, the Romans developed important ideas about  law  and  government . They developed the best army in the world at that time, and ruled by force. They had fine  engineering , and built roads, cities, and outstanding buildings. The Empire was divided into  province s, each with a governor plus  wikt:civil civil  and  military  support.  Letter s, both official and private, would constantly go to and from Rome.

 Trade  was most important for Rome, a city of more than a million people, by far the largest city in the world. They needed, and got,  wheat  from Egypt,  tin  from Britannia,  grape s from  Gaul , and so on. In return, the Romans built provincial capitals into fine cities, protected them from raids by  barbarian s, and provided education and career opportunities for young people in the provinces, such as careers in the  Roman army .

In principle, emperors had absolute control, and could do as they pleased. In practice, they faced many difficult problems. They had a staff of what we call ' Civil service civil servants ' and the advice of the  Roman Senate . The emperor had to decide what were the most important issues facing the Empire, and what should be done about them. Most of them tried to do two sorts of thing. One was to do things to improve the life of Romans in peacetime. The other was to fight and defeat Rome's enemies. A wealthy empire always has enemies.

With kings and emperors, a big problem is the  order of succession . Who follows them when they die? Kings were sometimes followed by their eldest son, if he was capable of ruling. For Roman emperors, more often it would be an  Adoption adopted  son. It worked like this. The emperor would notice an outstanding young man from one of the best families. He would adopt him as his son. Before he died he would make clear whom he thought should succeed him, by making him a  Roman consul , or by stating in his  Will (law) will  that the younger man should succeed him. Sometimes this worked; sometimes it did not. Every now and then there would be a  civil war  between claimants to the throne.

An adopted son or two gave the emperor more choices. Some emperors had no son; some had sons who were killed in battle, or died during a  plague . Later on, emperors grew so weak that the  Roman army  would just pick one of their  General officer generals  to be the next emperor. This often led to  civil war . The life stories of the emperors can be found in  List of Roman emperors .

The Romans fought many wars against other countries, and enjoyed watching violent  sports . They enjoyed watching races between  chariot s pulled by  horse s, and fights between men using  weapon s ( gladiator s). Unlike in modern  sport s, the fighters were often killed in these fights. Romans enjoyed these shows in the  Colosseum .

The Romans had great  civil engineering . They built many large public buildings and  wikt:villa villa s,  aqueduct s to carry  water ,  stone   bridge s and  road s. Some of these things can still be seen today. Many famous  writer s were Romans, including  Cicero  and  Virgil .

The  New Testament  of the  Bible  tells about the Romans in the life of  Jesus Christ . During Jesus' life, the Romans, who were  pagan s, ruled his country. Later, several emperors tried to  History of Christianity#Persecutions destroy Christianity  but they did not succeed. By 312 AD the emperor  Galerius  allowed people freedom to follow  Christianity , and the next year, a  General officer general ,  Constantine I (Rome) Constantine , became emperor and converted to Christianity.

The  city  of  Rome  was taken over several times by  barbarian s, notably in 410 AD when the  Goth s sacked the city ( looting ). The last Western Roman emperor,  Romulus Augustus , resigned in 476 AD. The Roman Empire would last another 1,000 years as the  Byzantine Empire  in the east.

The main  coin  of the Roman Empire was the silver  denarius .

  References  
 reflist 

  Other websites  
 commons Roman Empire 
   http://www.wdl.org/en/item/11745/ An old map of the Roman Empire in 400 AD 
   BBC ,  http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/romans Romans for Children , website on ancient Rome for children at the level of primary school
   http://www.classicsunveiled.com/romeh/html/index.html Rome Unleashed , interactive educational website on ancient Rome for students

 Category:Ancient Rome   
 Category:Empires