Ludovic Lazarus Zamenhof

Infobox person
  name   Ludovic Lazarus Zamenhof
  image   1908-kl-t-zamenhof.jpg
  caption   Ludwik Lejzer Zamenhof, 1908
  birth_name   Leyzer Leyvi Zamengov 
  birth_date    birth date 1859 12 15 
  birth_place    Bialystok ,  Russian Empire 
  death_date    death date and age 1917 4 14 1859 12 15 
  death_place    Warsaw ,  Poland 
  nationality    Poland Polish 
  ethnicity    Jews Jewish 
  known_for   Creator of  Esperanto 
  signature   Zamenhof subskribo.svg
 
 Ludovic Lazarus Zamenhof  (December 15, 1859   April 14, 1917) was an  eye  doctor, linguist, and scholar who created the international language  Esperanto . 

Zamenhof was born in  1859  in the town of  Bialystok ,  Poland . At the time, Poland was a part of the Russian Empire. Bialystok contained three major groups: Poles, Belorussians, and Yiddish-speaking  Jew s. Zamenhof thought that one common language would join these groups and stop fights between them.

His first language was said to be  Polish language Polish . His parents spoke  Russian language Russian  and  Yiddish  in the home. His father was a  German language German  teacher, so Zamenhof learned that language from an early age and spoke the language fluently. Later he learned  French language French ,  Latin ,  Greek language Greek ,  Hebrew language Hebrew  and  English language English . He also had an interest in  Italian language Italian ,  Spanish language Spanish  and  Lithuanian language Lithuanian .

Zamenhof decided that the international language must have a simple grammar and be easier to learn than  Volapuk , an earlier international language. He  wikt:attempt attempted  to create the international language with a grammar that was  wikt:rich rich , and  wikt:complex complex . The basics of Esperanto were published in  1887 .

His grandson,  Louis-Christophe Zaleski-Zamenhof , has lived in  France  since the 1960s.

  Other websites  
   http://www.visitbialystok.com VisitBialystok.com 

 Commons Ludwik Lejzer Zamenhof 

 DEFAULTSORT:Zamenhof, Ludovic Lazarus 
 Category:1859 births 
 Category:1917 deaths 
 Category:Esperanto 
 Category:Inventors 
 Category:Linguists 
 Category:Polish Jews 
 Category:Polish scientists