Law

The  law  is a set of  rule s that people are made to follow by the  state . The courts and police enforce this system of rules and  punishment punish  people who break the laws, such as by making them pay a  fine  or other  punishment penalty  or sending them to jail. In ancient societies, laws were written by  leader s, to set out rules on how people can live, work and do business with each other. Today in most countries, laws are written and voted on by groups of elected politicians in a  legislature , such as a  parliament  or congress. To follow the laws of a society is to do  legal  things. An activity is  illegal  if it breaks a law or does not follow the laws.

A  legal code  is a written code of laws that are  law enforcement enforce d. This may deal with things like  police ,  court s, or punishments. A  lawyer , jurist or attorney is a professional who studies and argues the rules of law. In the United States, there are two kinds of attorneys - "transactional" attorneys who write  contracts  and "litigators" who go to  court . In the United Kingdom, these professionals are called solicitors and barristers respectively. 

The  Rule of Law  is the law which says that government can only legally use its power in a way the government and the people agree on. It limits the powers a  government  has, as agreed in a country's  constitution . The  Rule of Law  prevents dictatorship and protects the rights of the people. When leaders enforce the legal code honestly, even on themselves and their friends, this is an example of the rule of law being followed. "The rule of law", wrote the ancient Greek philosopher  Aristotle  in 350 BC, "is better than the rule of any individual."

 Culture  is usually a major source of the principles behind many laws, as people tend to trust the ideas based on  family  and social habits. In many countries throughout history,  religion  and religious books like the  Vedas ,  Bible  or the  Koran  have been a major source of law.

  Types of law  
   Contract  law sets rules on agreements to buy and sell items and services.
   Property  law states the rights and obligations that a person has when they buy, sell, or rent homes and land (called  real property  or  real property realty ), and objects (called  personal property ).
   Intellectual property   (IP) law involves the rights people have over things they create, such as art, music, and literature. This is called  copyright . It also protects inventions that people make, by a kind of law called  patent . It also covers the rights people have to the names of a company or a distinctive mark or logo. This is called  trademark .
  Trust law (business Law) sets out the rules for money that is put into an  investment , such as pension funds that people save up for their retirement. It involves many different types of law, including administrative and property law.
 Tort law  helps people to make claims for  money compensation  (repayment) when someone hurts them or hurts their property.
 Crime Criminal law  is used by the government to prevent people from breaking laws, and punish people who do break them.
 Constitutional law  deals with the important rights of the government, and its relationship with the people. It mainly involves the interpretation of a  constitution , including things like the  Separation of powers  of the different branches of government.
 Administrative law is used by ordinary citizens who want to challenge decisions made by governments. It also involves things like  regulations , and the operation of the  Public administration administrative agencies . 
 International law  is used to set out rules on how countries can act in areas such as trade, the environment, or military action. The  Geneva Conventions  on the conduct of war and the  Roerich Pact  are examples of international law.
 Custom  and tradition are practices that are widely adopted and agreed upon in a society, thought often not in a written form. Custom and tradition can be enforced in courts and are sometimes considered as part of the legal reasoning in matters decided in courts. In some societies and cultures all law is or was custom and tradition, though this is increasingly rare although there are some parts of the world where custom tradition are still binding or even the predominant form of law, for example tribal lands or failed states.

  Civil law and common law  
 Civil law  is the legal system used in most countries around the world today. Civil law is based on legislation that is found in  constitution s or statutes passed by government. The secondary part of civil law is the legal approaches that are part of custom. In civil law governments, judges do not generally have much power, and most of the laws and  legal precedent  are created by  Member of Parliament Members of Parliament .
 
 Common law  is based on the decisions made by judges in past court cases. It comes from England and it became part of almost every country that once belonged to the British Empire, except  Malta ,  Scotland , the U.S. state of  Louisiana , and the Canadian province of  Quebec . It is also the predominant form of law in the United States, where many laws called  statutes  are written by  Congress , but many more legal rules exist from the decisions of the courts. Common law had its beginnings in the Middle Ages, when King John was forced by his barons to sign a document called the  Magna Carta .

  Religious law  
Religious law is law based on religious beliefs or books. Examples include the  Judaism Jewish   Halakha ,  Islam ic  Sharia , and  Christianity Christian   Canon law . 

Until the 1700s, Sharia law was the main legal system throughout the Muslim world. In some Muslim countries such as Saudi Arabia and Iran, the whole legal systems still base their law on Sharia law. Islamic law is often criticised because it often has harsh penalties for crimes. A serious criticism is the judgement of the  European Court  that "sharia is incompatible with the fundamental principles of  democracy ". ref name Judgement ref http://www.echr.coe.int/NR/rdonlyres/29AC6DBD-C3F8-411C-9B97-B42BE466EE7A/0/2004__Wildhaber_Cancado_Trindade_BIL__opening_legal_year.pdf Hearing of the European Court of Human Rights , January 22, 2004 (PDF) ref ref cite web url http://www.echr.coe.int/Eng/Press/2001/July/RefahPartisi2001jude.htm   title ECHR press release Refah Partisi (2001)  publisher Echr.coe.int  date   accessdate 2012-04-04 ref  

The  Turkey Turkish   Refah Party 's sharia-based "plurality of legal systems, grounded on religion" was ruled to contravene the  European Convention on Human Rights European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms . The Court decided Refah's plan would "do away with the State's role as the guarantor of individual rights and freedoms" and "infringe the principle of non-discrimination between individuals as regards their enjoyment of public freedoms, which is one of the fundamental principles of democracy". ref name Judgement http://www.strasbourgconsortium.org/common/document.view.php?docId=3878 , by Christian Moe, Norwegian Institute of Human Rights, published at the site of The Strasbourg Conference (31 pages). ref 

  History of law  
The history of law is closely connected to the development of human civilizations . Ancient  Egypt ian law developed in 3000 BC. In 1760 BC King  Hammurabi , took ancient  Babylon ian law and organized it, and then had it chiseled in stone for the public to see in the marketplace. These laws became known as the  Code of Hammurabi . 

The  Torah  from the  Old Testament  is an old body of law. It was written around 1280 BC. It has moral rules such as the Ten Commandments, which tell people what things are not permitted.

  Legislature  
In democracies, the people in a country usually choose people called politicians to represent them in a legislature. Examples of legislatures include the Houses of Parliament in London, the Congress in Washington, D.C., the Bundestag in Berlin, the Duma in Moscow and the Assemblee nationale in Paris. Most legislatures have two chambers or houses, a 'lower house' and an 'upper house'. To pass legislation, a majority of Members of Parliament must vote for a bill in each house. The legislature is the branch of government that writes laws, and votes on whether they will be approved.

  Judiciary  
The  judiciary  is a group of  judge s who resolve people's disputes and determine whether people who are charged with crimes are guilty. In some jurisdictions the judge does not find guilt or innocence but instead directs a jury, how to interpret facts from a legal perspective, but the jury determines the facts based on evidence presented to them and finds the guilt or innocences of the charged person.  Most countries of common law and civil law systems have a system of appeals courts, up to a supreme authority such as the Supreme Court or the High Court. The highest courts usually have the power to remove laws that are unconstitutional (which go against the constitution).

  Executive (government) and Head of State  
The executive is the governing center of political authority. In most democratic countries, the executive is elected from people who are in the legislature. This group of elected people is called the cabinet. In France, the US and Russia, the executive branch has a President which exists separately from the legislature. 

The executive suggests new laws and deals with other countries. As well, the executive usually controls the military, the police, and the bureaucracy. The executive selects ministers, or secretaries of state to control departments such as the health department or the department of justice. 

In many jurisdictions the Head of State does not take part in the day to day governance of the jurisdiction and takes a largely ceremonial role. This is the case in many Commonwealth nations where the Head of State, usually a Governor almost exclusively acts "on the advice" of the head of the Executive (e.g. the Prime Minister, First Minister or Premier). The primary legal role of the Head of State in these jurisdictions is to act as a check or balance against the Executive, as the Head of State has the rarely exercised power to dissolve the legislature, call elections and dismiss ministers.

  Other parts of the legal system  
The  police  enforce the criminal laws by arresting people suspected of breaking the law.  Bureaucracy Bureaucrats  are the government workers and government organizations that do work for the government. Bureaucrats work within a system of rules, and they make their decisions in writing. 

 Lawyer s  are people who have learned about laws. Lawyers give people advice about their legal rights and duties and represent people in  court . To become a lawyer, a person has to complete a two- or three-year  university  program at a law school and pass an entrance examination. Lawyers work in law firms, for the government, for companies, or by themselves. 

 Civil society  is the people and groups that are not part of government that try to protect people against human rights abuses and try to protect freedom of speech and other individual rights. Organizations that are part of civil society include political parties, debating clubs,  trade union s, human rights organizations,  newspaper s and charities.

" Corporation s are among the organizations that use the legal system to further their goals.  Like the others, they use means such as  campaign donation s and  advertising  to persuade people that they are right.  Corporations also engage in  commerce  and make new things such as  automobile s, vaporisers/e-cigarettes, and  Unmanned_aerial_vehicle s (i.e. "drones") that the old laws are not well equipped to deal with.

  Further reading  
 H.L.A. Hart,  The Concept of Law , (Penelope A. Bullock & Joseph Raz eds. 2nd ed. 1994) (1961).
 Sandro Nielsen:  The Bilingual LSP Dictionary. Principles and Practice for Legal Language . Benjamins 1994.
 A Companion to Contemporary Political Philosophy . edited by Robert E. Goodin and Philip Pettit. ISBN 0-631-19951-9.
 Johnson, Alan (1995).  The Blackwell Dictionary of Sociology . Blackwells publishers. ISBN 1-55786-116-1.
 Handbook of Political Institutions . edited by R. A. W. Rhodes, Sarah A. Binder and Bert A. Rockman. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-927569-6
 ''An Introduction to IP Law. edited by John Watts. Oxford University Press. Available at  http://www.patent-professionals.com Patent Professionals LLC 

  Related pages  
 Constitution 
 Constitutional economics 
 Ethics 
 Legal rights 
 Parliament 
   Physical law 
   Political economy 

  Other websites  
   http://en.citizendium.org/wiki/Law Law  -Citizendium

  References  
 commonscat 
 reflist 

 Category:Law  