Government

A  government  is a group of people that have the  Influence power  to rule in a  territory , according to the  law . This territory may be a  country , a  state  or  province  within a country, or a region. 
 
 Governments make  law s, rules, and regulations, collect  tax es and print  money . 
 Governments have systems of  :wikt:justice justice  that list the acts or activities that are against the law and describe the punishments for breaking the law. 
 Governments have a  police  force to make sure people follow the laws. 
 Governments have  diplomacy diplomats  who communicate with the governments of other  country countries  by having meetings. Diplomats try to solve problems or disagreements between two countries, which can help countries to avoid war, make commercial agreements, and exchange cultural or social experiences and  knowledge . 
 Governments have a  military  force such as an  army  that protects the country if other countries attack or which can be used to attack and invade other countries. 
 The  leader  of a government and his or her  advisor s are called the  administration . 

  Types of governments  
  Democracy  
The most common type of government in the Western world is called  democracy . In democracies, people in a country can vote during elections for representatives or political parties that they prefer. The people in democracies can elect representatives who will sit on  legislature s such as the  Parliament  or  Congress .  political party Political parties  are organizations of people with similar ideas about how a country or region should be governed. Different political parties have different ideas about how the government should handle different problems. Democracy is the government of the people, by the people and for the people. 

However, many countries have forms of democracy which limit freedom of choice by the voters. One of the most common ways is to limit which parties who can for parliament, or limit the parties access to mass media such as television. Another way is to rig the voting system by removing votes from opposition voters and substituting votes for the party in power. Few countries are textbook democracies, and the differences between them has been much studied. ref Hoppe, Hans-Hermann. 2001.  Democracy: the god that failed . Rutgers, N.J: Transaction.  http://archive.lewrockwell.com/hoppe/hoppe4.html ref ref  Benoist, Alain de 2011.  The problem of democracy . Arktos Media.  ref ref Graham, Gordon 2002.  The case against the democratic state: an essay in cultural criticism . Imprint Academic. ref 

  Monarchy  
A  monarchy  is a government ruled by a king or a queen who inherits their position from their family, which is often called the "royal family." There are two types of monarchies: absolute monarchies and constitutional monarchies. In an absolute monarchy, the ruler has no limits on their wishes or powers. In a  constitutional monarchy  a ruler's powers are limited by a document called a  constitution .

  Aristocracy  
An  aristocracy  is a government by the "best" people. A person who rules in an aristocracy is an aristocrat. Aristocracy is different from nobility, in that nobility means that one bloodline would rule, an aristocracy would mean that a few or many bloodlines would rule, or that rulers be chosen in a different manner.

  Dictatorship  
Under a  dictatorship , the government is run by one person who has all the power over the people in a country. Originally, the  Roman Republic  made dictators to lead during time of war. The Roman dictators (and Greek  tyrant s) were not always bad. The Roman dictators only held power for a small time. In modern times, a dictator's rule is not stopped by any laws, constitutions, or other social and political institutions. After World War II, many governments in Latin America, Asia, and Africa were ruled by dictators. Examples of dictators include  Josef Stalin ,  Adolf Hitler , Augusto Pinochet,   Idi Amin ,  Muammar al-Qaddafi , and  Gamal Abdul Nasser .

  Oligarchy  
An  oligarchy  is a government ruled by a small group of powerful people. These people may spread power equally or not equally. An oligarchy is different from a true democracy because very few people are given the chance to change things. An oligarchy does not have to be hereditary or passed down from father to son. An oligarchy does not have one clear ruler, but several powerful people. Some past examples of oligarchy are the former  Union of Soviet Socialist Republics  and  Apartheid   South Africa . A fictional example is the  dystopia n society of  Oceania  in the book  Nineteen Eighty-Four . Some critics of  representative democracy  think of the  United States  as an oligarchy. This view is shared by  anarchism anarchists .

  The history and the theory of government  

The simplest idea of government is those who  rule  over  wikt:people people  and  land . This may be as small as a community with some sort of board that looks after the goings on of those who live within it or something a little larger like a  village  or as big as a  continent  (like  Australia  and  India ). 

Those people who rule the land can allow others to  own  it. It is a  wikt:deed deed  by government that gives this right in the way that  law s describe. Some think they have the right to hold land without government permission. This view is called  libertarianism . Others think they can do so together as a group with others if they live in  peace , without government. This view is called  anarchism . 

Almost every place on  Earth  is connected to one and only one government. Places without government are where people follow traditions instead of government rules, small  border dispute d areas and the continent of Antarctica, because almost no people live there. For every other place on Earth there is a government that claims 'sovereign control' over it. The word "sovereign" is old and means "control by a  King " ( sovereign ). Governments of  village s,  city cities ,  county counties  and other  community communities  are also subordinate to the government of the state or province where they exist, and then to that of the  country .

It is from Kings and  feudalism  that modern governments and  nation state s came. The  Capital (city) capital  of a country, for instance, is where the King kept his  asset s. From this we get the modern idea of  capital (economics) capital  in  economics . A government is said to  wikt:regulation regulate   trade  as well as to rule over land.

Governments also control people and decide things about what  morality  to accept or  punish . In very many countries, there are strict rules about  sexual intercourse  and  drug s that are part of  law  and offenders are punished for disobeying them.

 Tax  is how government is paid for in most countries. People who  buy ,  sales sell ,  import ,  invest , own a house or land, or earn money are made to pay some of the  money  to a government.

There are many theories of how to organize government better. These are called theories of  civics . Because government is run by people who can be greedy, many people think  leader s must be  elect ed by some kind of  democracy . That way, if government does not act nice, they can be replaced in the next  election . Still many countries' governments are not a  democracy  but other forms in which only a few people have power.

There are many theories of how to run a government better, and keep people from hurting each other. These theories are part of  politics . No matter how a government is chosen, it must do politics to keep  Influence power .

 Related pages 
 commonscat 
   Constitution 
   Constitutional economics 
   Law 
   Legal rights 
   Political economy 
   Local government 

  References  
 reflist 


 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Government  