Synagogue

Judaism 
 File:Great Synagogue Jerusalem.jpg thumb|220px|right|The Great Synagogue in Jerusalem 
A  synagogue  is a place where  Judaism Jews  meet to  worship  and  pray  to  God .

In  Hebrew language Hebrew , a synagogue is called  beit knesset , which means, a "house of gathering". The word "synagogue" comes from  sunagoge , which is a  Greek language Greek  word. In a synagogue, Jews carry out the  Jewish services , which consist of prayers, sometimes with special actions.

A synagogue will usually have a large room for prayers. There might be some smaller rooms for studying. There will be some offices. There will also usually be a big room for special events. 

The front of a synagogue faces towards  Jerusalem  in  Israel .  In the front is the holiest part of the synagogue, the  Ark . This is a closet which has the  Torah  scrolls inside.  The Torah scrolls have the holy writings of Judaism on them.  The Ark usually has a curtain in front of it.

On top of the Ark is light which is always lit, called the " Eternal Lamp ". It is a symbol which means that God is always there.
Every synagogue has a raised platform called the " Bimah ". The person who reads the Torah scroll stands there when he reads. The Bimah is either in the middle of the hall, or in front of the Ark.

In some synagogues men and women sit in different places. Some synagogues even have a short wall so that they can not see each other. This is so that the people will think about the prayers better.

Jews may call synagogues by different names. Many  Orthodox Judaism Orthodox  and  Conservative Judaism Conservative  Jews living in  English language English -speaking countries use the name "synagogue" or the word "shul.", which is  Yiddish . Jews who speak  Spanish language Spanish  or  Portuguese language Portuguese  call synagogues  esnoga . Some Jews call the synagogue a  temple . 

Jewish worship does not have to be carried out in a synagogue.  It can be wherever a  minyan  of ten Jews are. It could be in someone's home or anywhere such as a cruise liner or an airplane  Some synagogues have a separate room or torah study, this is called the beth midrash meaning house of study.  Some kinds of Jewish worship can be done alone or with fewer than ten people.

 commons 

 Category:Synagogues   
 Category:Judaism 
