Education

Education  is about  teaching  and learning  skill s and  knowledge . Education also means helping people to learn how to do things and encouraging them to think about what they learn. It is also important for educators to teach ways to find and use information.

Through education, the knowledge of  society ,  country , and of the  world  is passed on from  generation  to generation. In  democracy democracies , through education,  children  and  adult s are supposed to learn how to be active and effective  citizen s.

More specific, education helps and guide individuals to transform from one class to other. Empowered individuals, societies, countries by education are taking edge over individuals stand on bottom pyramid of growth.   File:Graz University-Library reading-room.jpg thumb| Library  reading-room of  Graz  University. 

  Types of education  
There are different methods of categorizing types of education. One way is to divide it into  formal education ,  non- formal  education , and  informal education .

 Formal education  is usually in  school , where a person may learn basic, academic, or trade skills. Small children often attend a  nursery  or  kindergarten  but often formal education begins in  elementary school  and continues with  secondary school . Post-secondary education (or higher education) is usually at a  college  or  university  which may grant an  academic degree .

 Non-formal education  includes adult basic education, adult  literacy  education or school equivalency preparation.  In nonformal education someone (who is not in school) can learn literacy, other basic skills or job skills.   Home education ,  individualized instruction  (such as  programmed learning ),  distance learning  and  computer-assisted instruction  are other possibilities.

 Informal education  may be a parent teaching a child how to prepare a  meal  or ride a  bicycle .  People can also get an informal education by reading many  books  from a  library  or educational  website s.  Informal education is when you are not studying in a school and do not use any particular  learning  method.

  Public schooling  
Many  public school s provide a free education through the  government .  Parents may send their children to a  private school s, but they must pay for it.  In some  Poverty poorer  places, some children cannot go to school, because their countries do not make education available in their countries, or because their families do not have enough money, or because the children have to  child labour work for money , or because the society have negative  prejudice  on education for  girl s.

  Higher education  

There are  primary school s and  secondary school s. In many places they are government funded. Colleges and universities usually charge  Tuition payments  which may be very different in different countries. .

  Related pages  
   Distance education 
   Homeschooling  - education at home
   Special education  - education of students who have a  disability 
   Subject (school) 
   Right to education 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Education  