Essen

About the city in Germany other places with the same name Essen (disambiguation) 
 Infobox German Location
 Art   city
 image_photo   Villa Hugel, Essen, 20071222.jpg
 image_caption   Villa Hugel near the river Ruhr
 Wappen   DEU Essen COA.svg
 lat_deg   51   lat_min   27   lat_sec   3
 lon_deg   7   lon_min   0   lon_sec   47
 Bundesland   North Rhine-Westphalia
 Regierungsbezirk    Dusseldorf (region) Dusseldorf 
 Kreis   urban
 Hohe   116
 Flache   210.32
 Einwohner   581406
 pop_ref    ref http://www.essen.de/deutsch/Rathaus/Statistik/Einwohner_2006.pdf ref 
 Stand   2007-03-31
 pop_metro   5.302.179
 pop_metro_date   2004-12-31
 PLZ   45001-45359
 PLZ-alt   4300
 Vorwahl   0201, 02054 ( Essen-Kettwig Kettwig )
 Kfz   E
 Gemeindeschlussel   05 1 13 000
 NUTS   DEA13
 LOCODE   DE ESS
 Gliederung   9 districts, 50 boroughs
 Website    http://www.essen.de/ www.essen.de 
 Burgermeister   Reinhard Pass
 Burgermeistertitel   Oberburgermeister
 Partei   SPD
 ruling_party1   SPD
 ruling_party2   Green
 
 Essen  is a  Germany German  city in the  States of Germany state  of  North Rhine-Westphalia . It is on the  Ruhr River  and it is near  Cologne ,  Duisburg  and  Bochum . 585,000 people live in Essen. Together with  Dortmund  Essen is the biggest city of the Ruhr area with its 5,000,000 inhabitants. Essen is often called the shopping city ( Einkaufsstadt ) because there are so many malls and shops in it.

  Location of Essen  

Essen is in  North Rhine-Westphalia  and part of the  Ruhr area , where eleven cities and four districts are. The rivers  Ruhr  and  Emscher  flow through the city. The lake  Baldeney  is part of the Ruhr. Essen's neighbour cities are  Oberhausen ,  Mulheim an der Ruhr ,  Ratingen ,  Heiligenhaus  and  Velbert  in the Rhineland and  Hattingen ,  Bochum ,  Gelsenkirchen ,  Gladbeck  and  Bottrop  in Westphalia. Other near cities are  Duisburg ,  Dusseldorf ,  Cologne ,  Dortmund  and  Munster .

  Politics  

Because of the large number of coal mine workers in Essen the  SPD , the Social Democratic Party of Germany, always was very strong in Essen. During the time of  National socialism National Socialism  the  Nazi Party  installed the mayors. But from  1999  to  2009  the Christian Democratic Party ruled the city with the mayor  Dr.Wolfgang Reiniger . At the local elections of 2009, the SPD's candidate  Reinhard Pass  became the new mayor.

  Famous things in Essen  
   Villa Hugel  (the villa of the family  Krupp )
   Cathedral (Munster)  (head of the  Roman Catholic Diocese of Essen . In the  Domschatzkammer , the dome treasure chamber, is the  Golden Madonna of Essen )
   Old Synagogue  ( Alte Synagoge )
   Lichtburg  (the oldest cinema of  Germany )
   Zeche Zollverein  (Zollverein Coal Mine, part of the  World Heritage Site UNESCO World Heritage Sites  since  2001 )
   Folkwang museum  (a big musum with a famous music academy)
   Werden abbey  (a monastery from the  Order of Saint Benedict , founded in 800)
   Aalto theatre  (the greatest theatre of Essen, built by the  Finnland Finnish  architect  Alvar Aalto )
   Essen philharmonic orchestra  (this building, also known as  Saalbau , is next to the  Aalto theatre )
 File:Essen Lichtburg 1.jpg thumb|The cinema Lichtburg 
 File:Aalto-Theater 02.jpg thumb|The Aalto theatre 

  History of Essen  

Around  850  Saint Altfrid founded the  Damenstift , an abbey for women, ruled by a prince abbess. In this time the cathedral of Essen was built. In those days the name of the city was  Assindia  in  Latin . Later it changed over  Essendia  and  Essend  to  Essen .  1377  Essen became a  free imperial city . At this time, Essen was just a small city in a region where few people lived. The city became more important when the  industrialization  began. In  1811   Friedrich Krupp  founded a small steel factory in Essen which was fast growing. The city population also grew and 80 years after the foundation of Krupp's steel work Essen was a big city with 100,000 inhabitants. Because in the region of the  Ruhr River  much coal was found, many coal mines were founded in Essen and other near cities. Great industrial families like the  Krupp s, the  Haniel s and the  Grillo s gave money for cultural buildings like the Grillo theatre and the Folkwang museum. Because it's big industry Essen was destroyed with bombs at the  Second World War . Many people gave their live and many buildings were destroyed restless. Not all were rebuild after WW2. But because the coal mining industry ended mining in Essen in the  1970 's (coal from abroad was getting cheaper), the city was getting poor. The  Strukturwandel  (structural change)saved Essen. Old collieries like  Zeche Zollverein  became museums or theatres.  2003  the universities of Essen and  Duisburg  built together the university Duisburg-Essen.
 2010  Essen will be  Kulturhauptstadt Europas  (European Capital of Culture) together with  Istanbul  and  Pecs  in  Hungary .

  Media in Essen  
 File:WDR-Studio in Essen.jpg thumb|WDR-studio in Essen 
The  WDR  ( Westdeutscher Rundfunk/Western German Broadcasting ) has a  TV -station in Essen. The two biggest newspapers, the  WAZ  ( Westdeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung/Western German common newspaper ) and the  NRZ , the  Neue Ruhr Zeitung/New Ruhr newspaper  (at the lower  Rhine   region Neue Rhein Zeitung/New Rhein newspaper ) are in the city. Both newspapers belong to the WAZ-media group. Essen also has a radio station named  Radio Essen .

  Boroughs of Essen  

 File:Zollverein Schacht 12.jpg thumb|Zeche Zollverein in Essen-Katernberg 
 File:SchlossBorbeck01.jpg thumb|Borbeck castle 
 File:Essen Stadtteile und Stadtbezirke.svg thumb|Districts and boroughs of Essen 
Essen has nine districts ( Bezirke ) and 50 boroughs ( Stadtteile ). The most famous and most known are  Kettwig , which was till  1975  a separate town and not part of Essen, with the  Altstadt  of Kettwig, where many timber framing houses are ( Fachwerkhauser ). Also well-known is  Werden . It lays like Kettwig in the south of the city and is the oldest borough of Essen. The  Werden abbey  stands here. In Essen- Ruttenscheid  there are many cultural buildings (like the  Folkwang  or the  Ruhrland  museum). The WDR-studio and Essen's trade fair, the  Gruga  are also in Ruttenscheid. In the north of Essen is  Katernberg , where in the past the coal mine workers lived. Here is  Zeche Zollverein . In Katernberg many houses were built by the family  Krupp  for their workers. Another big coal mine worker's borough, perhaps the biggest, is  Margarethenhohe  near Ruttenscheid. It is named after  Margarethe Krupp , wife of  Friedrich Alfred Krupp . The Krupps wanted, that their workers were absolutely dependent on them. So they built houses and malls for them, where they should spend their money, what they got from Krupp, again to the industrials. Today Margarethenhohe is one of the most beautiful boroughs of Essen. Another big borough of Essen is  Steele  in the east of the city, that was in the 19th and the early 20th century a city as big as Essen. In the west of Essen is  Borbeck , which was long very separate from Essen. In Borbeck is the great  Borbeck Castle (Schloss Borbeck) . The people of Borbeck speak their own regional dialect the  Borbecker Platt .

The nine districts of Essen are:

   Bezirk I (Stadtmitte/Frillendorf/Huttrop) 
   Bezirk II (Ruttenscheid/Bergerhausen/Rellinghausen/Stadtwald) 
   Bezirk III (Essen-West) 
   Bezirk IV (Borbeck) 
   Bezirk V (Altenessen/Karnap/Vogelheim) 
   Bezirk VI (Katernberg/Schonnebeck/Stoppenberg) 
   Bezirk VII (Steele/Kray) 
   Bezirk VIII (Ruhrhalbinsel) 
   Bezirk IX (Werden/Kettwig/Bredeney) 

  Famous people in Essen  
 File:Ruhmann1.jpg thumb|Heinz Ruhmann, one of the most famous German actors of the 20th century 
The most known people from Essen are the actor  Heinz Ruhmann , whose parents were the owner of Essen's famous hotel  Handelshof  near the Central Station ( Hauptbahnhof) ,  Carl Humann , explorer of the Great Altar of Pergamon,  Karl Baedeker , a publisher whose company made many books for tourists ( Baedeker ),  Alfred Krupp  and  Franz Dinndendahl , who made the first steam machine in the Ruhr area. These people were born in the city. Other people who were not born in Essen but lived and worked there a long time are  Berthold Beitz , who saved the Krupp company from the ruin,  Wilhelm Busch , a famous poet and painter or  Gustav Heinemann , a  Germany German  politician who was mayor of Essen and federal president of  Germany . Other people like  Otto von Bismarck  and  Paul von Hindenburg  were honorary people in Essen.
 File:Hotel Handelshof Essen.jpg thumb|Hotel Handeshof - on the roof the armorial of Essen and the text  Essen die Einkaufsstadt  (Essen the shopping city) 

  Sport  

The most popular  sport  in  Germany  is  Association football  or  soccer . The most important soccer clubs of Essen are  Rot-Weiss Essen (RWE)  and  Schwarz-Weiss Essen . They play in the 4th and the 5th league. More successfully is the women's association football club  SG Essen-Schonebeck  that plays in the first  Bundesliga . 
The second big sport is team handball.  TUSEM Essen  is the most important club in Essen. 
The most popular ice hockey club is named  ESC Moskitos Essen  and the biggest basketball club  ETB Wohnbau Baskets Essen . 
Essen also has got many table tennis and swimming clubs.

  Twin towns  
Essen's  twin town s are:

   flag UK  -  Sunderland , since 1949
   flag Finland  -  Tampere , since 1960
   flag France  -  Grenoble , since 1974
   flag Russia  -  Nizhny Novgorod , since 1991
   flag Israel  -  Tel Aviv-Yafo , since 1991

  References  
 reflist 

 Commons Essen 

 WHSite 

 Category:Cities with more than 500,000 inhabitants 
 Category:Urban districts in Regierungsbezirk Dusseldorf 
 Category:World Heritage Sites in Germany 
 Category:Imperial free cities