1967

redlinks date April 2012 
 Year nav 1967 

 1967  ( Roman numerals MCMLXVII ) was a  common year starting on Sunday  of the  Gregorian calendar .

  Events  
   February 2  - The  American Basketball Association  is formed.
   February 15  -  Chicago (band) Chicago , a musical group forms
   March 13  -  Indira Gandhi  becomes prime minister of  India .
   April 28  -  Montreal  hosts  Expo '67 .
   May 1  -  Elvis Presley  married  Priscilla Presley Priscilla Beaulieu .
   June 5  -  June 10  - The  Six-Day War 
   November 30  -  Pakistan Peoples Party  is founded by  Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto 
   December 3  -  Dr. Christiaan Barnard  transplanted the first  heart .
  The  Summer of Love 
   Blue Oyster Cult  forms.
   Jethro Tull (band) Jethro Tull  forms.

  Births  
   February 10  -  Laura Dern , American actress
   February 20  -  Kurt Cobain , rock musician (d. 1994)
   March 17  -  Debi Derryberry , American actress
   May 7  -  Martin Bryant ,  Australia n criminal
   June 20  -  Nicole Kidman , actress
   July 23  -  Philip Seymour Hoffman , American actor (d. 2014)
   October 16  -  Davina McCall ,  England English   television   presenter 
   October 28  -  Julia Roberts , actress
   November 7  -  David Guetta ,  France French   DJ 
   November 16  -  Lisa Bonet , actress
   November 22  -  Boris Becker ,  tennis  player
   November 28  -  Anna Nicole Smith ,  United States American   actor actress  (d. 2007)
   December 17  -  Gigi D'Agostino , Italian musician and DJ
   December 19  -  Criss Angel , American illusionist

  Deaths  
   January 3  -  Jack Ruby , killer of  Lee Harvey Oswald 
   January 4  -  Donald Campbell , waterspeed/landspeed record seeker.
   April 19  -  Konrad Adenauer , German statesman
   July 8  -  Fatimah Jinnah , Pakistani Mother of the Nation.
   October 9  -  Che Guevara , Argentinian Marxist revolutionary (b.  1928 )
   December 10  -  Otis Redding , American singer

  Nobel Prizes  
   Nobel Prize  in  Nobel Prize in Physics Physics  -  Hans Albrecht Bethe , American physicist
   Nobel Prize in Chemistry Chemistry  -  Manfred Eigen ,  Ronald George Wreyford Norrish ,  George Porter 
   Nobel Prizein Physiology or Medicine Medicine  -  Ragnar Granit ,  Haldan Keffer Hartline ,  George Wald 
   Nobel Prize in Literature Literature  -  Miguel Angel Asturias , Guatemalan writer
 Nobel Peace Prize Peace  - not awarded

  Movies released  
   The Dirty Dozen 
   Fearless Vampire Killers 
   To Sir With Love 
   In the Heat of the Night 

  Popular songs  
  All You Need is Love -  The Beatles 
  Daydream Believer -  The Monkees 
  Groovin' -  The Young Rascals 
  Happy Together -  The Turtles 
  Hello Goodbye -  The Beatles 
  I'm A Believer -  The Monkees 
  Incense And Peppermints -  Strawberry Alarm Clock 
  The Letter -  The Box Tops 
  Light My Fire -  The Doors 
  Ode to Billy Joe -  Bobbie Gentry 
  Ooh Baby -  Bo Diddley 
  Penny Lane -  The Beatles 
  Respect -  Aretha Franklin 
  Ruby Tuesday -  The Rolling Stones 
  To Sir With Love -  Lulu (singer) Lulu 
  Windy -  The Association 

  New Books  
 0031/2: The Adventures of James Bond Junior  - R.D. Mascott ( Arthur Calder-Marshall )
 The Arrangement  -  Elia Kazan 
 The Chosen (Chaim Potok) The Chosen  -  Chaim Potok 
 Christy  -  Catherine Marshall 
 The Confessions of Nat Turner  -  William Styron 
 The Crows of Pearblossom  -  Aldous Huxley 
 Death of a President  -  William Manchester 
 Down These Mean Streets  -  Piri Thomas 
 The Eighth Day  -  Thornton Wilder 
 The Exhibitionist  -  Henry Sutton 
 The Gabriel Hounds  -  Mary Stewart 
 Go to the Widow-Maker  -  James Jones (writer) James Jones 
 Ice (novel) Ice  -  Anna Kavan 
 I Heard the Owl Call My Name  -  Margaret Craven 
 Jerusalem the Golden  -  Margaret Drabble 
 Killing Time (Thomas Berger novel) Killing Time  -  Thomas Berger (US novelist) Thomas Berger 
 Miramar  -  Naguib Mahfouz 
 One Hundred Years of Solitude  -  Gabriel Garcia Marquez 
 Rosemary's Baby -  Ira Levin 
 The Silent Cry -  Oe Kenzaburo 
 Topaz (novel) Topaz  -  Leon Uris 
 Where Eagles Dare  -  Alistair MacLean 
 Wild Season  -  Allan W. Eckert 

 Commonscat 1967 

 Category:1967  