Devil

File:At the Devil's Ball 1.jpg thumb|220px|right|A common image of the devil, red, with  horn (anatomy) horns  and a  tail 
In some  religion s, the  devil  is a bad  spirit  that tries to create problems for people. Some people also use the words "the Devil" or " Satan " for the most powerful devil. The word "devil" comes from the Greek word "diabolos" which means "someone who tells lies to hurt you". ("Diabolos" is translated to the English word " slander er.") The  New Testament  uses "diabolos" as a title for  Satan , and so "The Devil" became another name for Satan in English.

In the  Old Testament , there is the  serpent  and the  shaitan , who may be two different characters. "Shaitan" in  Hebrew language Hebrew  means "adversary", an enemy or opponent. Shaitan is also the word used for the devil in the  Koran , who often appears as an animal and tries to get people to do the wrong thing. ref cite web  url http://www.tfd.com/shaitan   title shaitan  accessdate 27 December 2009  format   work The Free Dictionary  ref 

In  Christianity  the Devil was originally an  angel  in  heaven  called Lucifer. But he wanted to be the ruler of heaven and so he revolted against God. After a hard fight he was defeated and thrown out of heaven. Some other angels who helped him were also thrown out.

After the Devil was thrown out of heaven, he started doing bad things on the earth. He wants people to worship him instead of God. Sometimes he tries to trick people by giving them false promises. ref cite web  url http://www.gospel-mysteries.net/devil-satan.html   title The Devil  accessdate 17 February 2010  format   work Gospel Mysteries  ref 

The other angels who were thrown out of heaven became evil spirits called demons. They obey the Devil and help him do evil things.

The  Book of Revelation  says that God will punish the Devil and his demons by throwing them into a Lake of Fire that burns in  Hell . This will happen in the future.

Artists draw pictures of the Devil that show him as ugly and evil. But nobody knows what he may look like. Usually he is a spirit that nobody can see, but he can make himself look like a real person in order to trick people. Many modern depictions of the devil portray him as a red human-like being with  Horn (anatomy) horns  and a pointed  tail , carrying a red  pitchfork .

Not all religions believe in the devil. For example,  Buddhism Buddhists  do not believe in the devil. fact date October 2013  Many  Satanism satanists  believe in the devil or Satan only as a  metaphor , not an actual being or person.

 References 
 reflist 

 Category:Theology 
 Category:Demons