Cheese

File:Various cheeses.jpg thumb|Some different types of cheese 
 Cheese  is milk made into a solid form that you eat. There are many types of cheese. Many things affect the  form ,  texture  and  flavor  of a cheese. These include the milk ( cow  or  goat ), if the milk has been  Pasteurization pasteurized , the amount of  butterfat ,  bacteria  and  mold  in the cheese, how the cheese is made and how old the cheese is.

For some cheeses, the milk is  curd led by adding  acid s such as  vinegar  or  lemon  juice. Most cheeses are acidified by bacteria. This bacteria turns milk  sugar s into  lactic acid .  Rennet  is then used to finish the curdling.   Vegetarianism Vegetarian  alternatives to rennet can also be used. Most of these are made by  fermentation  of a  fungus  called  Mucor miehei . Other alternatives use species of the  Cynara   thistle   family (biology) family . ref Jenkins, Steven 1996.  Cheese Primer . Workman Publishing Company. ISBN 0894807625 ref 

  The origin of cheese  
People have been making cheese since before  history  was written down. It is not known when cheese was first made. It is known that cheese was eaten by the  Sumerians  in about 4000 BC. ref cite web url http://www.thenibble.com/REVIEWS/main/cheese/cheese2/history.asp title The history of cheese: from an ancient nomad's horseback to today's luxury cheese cart  work The Nibble publisher Lifestyle Direct. accessdate 2012-02-09 ref 

  How cheese is made  
Cheese is made using milk. The milk of  cow s,  goat s, and  sheep  are most popular.  Buffalo ,  camel  and even  Horse mare 's milk can also be used. Cheese makers usually cook the milk in large  pot s. They add  salt  and a  substance  from the  stomach  of young cows called  rennet . This curdles the cheese and makes it solid. Some makers do not add  rennet . They curdle the cheese in other ways. Cheese made in  factory factories  is often curdled by using bacteria. Other  ingredients  are added and the cheese is usually aged for a short time.

  Types of cheese  
There are many different ways to classify cheeses. Some ways include:
  How long the cheese was aged 
  The  texture  of the cheese. These include Hard, Soft and Softer.
  How the cheese was made
  What type of  milk  was used to make the cheese. This is mainly what  animal  the milk comes from. The  diet  of the animal can also affect the type of cheese made from its milk.
  How much  fat  is in the cheese
  What color the cheese is

There are also man-made foods that some people use instead of cheese. These are called  Cheese analogue s.

Different types of cheese include:

 width 75% align top 
   Cream cheese 
   Processed cheese 
   Blue cheese 
   Swiss cheese 
   Mozzarella 
 align top 
   Parmesan cheese 
   Limburger cheese 
   Brie 
   Gouda (cheese) Gouda 
   Cheddar 
 align top 
   Edam cheese Edam 
   Wensleydale 
   Goat's milk cheese 
   Emmental cheese 
   Marble cheese 
 
 References 
 Reflist 

 Commonscat Cheese 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Cheese  