British English

British English  is the kind of  English language  which is used in the  United Kingdom  and in most countries which previously were in the  British Empire .

  Pronunciation in British English  
In the United Kingdom, many different people say words in different ways. For example, a man from a place near  London  may not pronounce his "r"s the same as a man from  Scotland  or a man from  Northern Ireland . Across the country, the accent is different. For instance, in  Liverpool , one speaks with a "scouse" accent, and in  London , one speaks with a "cockney" accent. Different variations on all of British English exist from the manner in which words are pronounced to the manner in which they are spelt. One place people speak English in a different way is  Cornwall , where the  Cornish dialect  is spoken. 

  Other languages  
Britain, like other countries, has languages other than English. In  Wales  many speak  Welsh language Welsh ; in  Scotland  some people speak  Gaelic , and in  Ireland  a few people speak  Irish language Irish . However, that is not the subject of this particular article.

  Spelling in British English  
British English often keeps more traditional ways of spelling words than American English. 

  Some British English words end in "re", because the words were originally taken from  French language French .  They are often simplified to "er" in American English
 British English: centre, litre, metre.
 American English: center, liter, meter.
  Some British English words end in "our" and are simplified to "or" in American English. The English spelling also came from the French language.
 British English: colour, favour, honour, labour
 American English: color, favor, honor, labor
  Some British English words the have come originally from the Greek language use "ph". This has been changed to "f" in some other languages.
 British English: Sulphur
  American English: Sulfur
  Some words in British English use "s" where "z" is used in American English. However, spelling them with "z" is also done in Britain sometimes.
 British English: colonisation, realisation, organisation
 American English: colonization, realization, organization
  The word " gray " is also a special case, as it is normally spelled "gray" in American English and "grey" in British English. However, "gray" is also used in Britain, and "grey" is also used in America.
  Many of these rules are also used in other countries outside of the  United Kingdom , mostly in countries that are members in the  Commonwealth of Nations .

  Vocabulary in British English  
In British English, "dock" refers to the  water  in the space between two "piers" or "wharfs". In American English, the "pier" or "wharf" could be called a "dock", and the water between would be a "slip".

Some common differences:

British - American
  accelerator - throttle fact date October 2015 
   autumn  - fall
   biscuit  - cookie
  bonnet - hood (of a car)
   boot  - trunk (of a car)
  bum - butt
  caravan - trailer, mobile home
  chips -  French fries 
  courgette -  zucchini 
  crisps - chips
  face flannel - washcloth
  flat - apartment
   football (soccer) football  - soccer
  garden - yard
  handbag - purse
  jumper - sweater
   lift  - elevator
  lorry - truck
  manual gearbox - stick shift
  metro, underground, tube - subway
  motorway - freeway
  mum - mom
  nappy - diaper
  number plate - license plate
  pants - underpants
  pavement - sidewalk
  pram - stroller
  petrol - gas or gasoline
  phone box - phone booth
  post - mail, mailbox
   railway  - railroad
  shifting - moving
  shopping trolley - shopping cart
  surname - last name
  take-away - take-out
  trousers - pants
  to let - to rent
  torch - flashlight
  tram - streetcar

  Usage in different countries  
 American English  is only an official language in the  United States . In  Canada , American English spelling is sometimes used, but traditionally, British English is used. Although Commonwealth English is the most spoken, American English is seen more often on the internet. American English vocabulary dominates the visual media: "movies" (British: "films") and television.

All  Commonwealth of Nations Commonwealth  nations and Africa learn Commonwealth English, while American English is often learnt in the Americas and China. Z pronounced 'Zee' is only seen in the U.S.A and less commonly in Canada, while Z pronounced 'Zed' is spoken almost everywhere else. The United Kingdom and Ireland use British layout keyboards, while Australia, South Africa, Canada, New Zealand and the U.S.A use American layout keyboards. In continental  Europe   English as a second language  is nowadays sometimes even taught in American English, except perhaps in  Scandinavia  and the  Netherlands .

  Other websites  
   http://www.digitas.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/wiki/ken/BritishVsAmerican British and American English differences 

 Category:Dialects of English