Church

about the church as a building the Church as a Christian organization One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church other uses of the word "church" Church (disambiguation) 
 File:Brazil.Brasilia.01.jpg thumb| Brasilia  Cathedral 
A  church  is a  building  that was constructed to allow people to meet to  worship  together. These people are usually  Christianity Christians , or influenced by Christianity. Some other religious groups also call their religious buildings churches. ref Introduction to New and Alternative Religions in America: 2006 - Page 252 ref ref An Introduction to the Unitarian and Universalist Traditions - Page 128, 2011 ref 

Depending on the number of people that are in a community, the churches come in different sizes. Small churches are called  chapel s. The churches in a particular geographical area form a group called the  diocese .  Each diocese has a  cathedral .  In most cases, the cathedral is a very big church. Cathedrals are the seat of  bishop s.

  History of church buildings  

 File:Checkendon Church.jpg thumb|An old English church showing Saxon architecture (rounded end) 
 File:Aberlady Church.jpg thumb|Aberlady Church near  Edinburgh ,  Scotland 
 File:ClevelandTabernacleBaptistChurch.jpg thumb|Small church in  Ohio 
 File:Lindenberg Kirche.jpg thumb|Lindenberg Church, near  Berlin ,  Germany  is a  13th century  church. 
 File:EvoraCathedral-Transept.jpg thumb|Inside the transept of the Cathedral of Evora, Portugal  
 File:Speyer Dom pano.jpg thumb| :en:Speyer_Cathedral Speyer Cathedral , the largest  Romanesque architecture Romanesque  building still in existence. 
 File:Madeleine Paris.jpg thumb| :en:La_Madeleine,_Paris La Madeleine, Paris  is one of the main sights in  Paris, France 

In the  Early Christianity early days of Christianity  people had to worship in secret. Christian worship was not allowed in the  Roman empire , so Christians had to meet in a secret place. Sometimes they met in people's houses or barns, sometimes they met underground. The first places that were built for Christian worship were small chapels that were cut into a rock where people could worship without being discovered.

After the death of the Roman emperor  Constantine I (Rome) Constantine  in  337  A.D. Christians were allowed to have buildings to worship in. These first churches were built on a similar plan to Roman  basilica s. This plan was later used for the fine  Gothic  cathedrals and churches that were built at the end of the  Middle Ages .

  The parts of a church  
 further List of church architecture terms 

There are several parts in the architecture of a church. Not all churches will have all these parts:

  The  nave  is the main part of the church where the congregation (the people who come to worship) sit. 
  The  aisles  are the sides of the church which may run along the side of the nave....
  The  transept , if there is one, is an area which crosses the nave near the top of the church. This makes the church shaped like a cross, which is a symbol of the belief that  Jesus  died on the  crucifix cross .
  The  chancel  leads up to the  altar  at the top of the church. The altar is in the  sanctuary . The word " sanctuary " means "sacred place". People were not allowed to be  arrest ed in the sanctuary, so they were safe. The altar is usually at the  east  end of the church. People in the church sit facing the altar. We say that the church "faces east".
  Churches will also have a  tower  or  steeple , usually at the west end. If the church has a transept the tower may be above the centre of the transept.

In Roman Catholic churches there is always a stoup (bowl) of  holy water  near the entrance of the church. This tradition comes from the fact that Roman  basilica s had a fountain for washing in front of the entrance. The  font  is a bowl where people (often babies) are  baptism baptized . This is also near the entrance of the church. This is a symbol of the fact that it is welcoming the people into the Christian church.

Traditionally the nave has long  bench es for the congregation to sit on. These are called  pews . Some churches may now have replaced their pews with chairs so that they can be moved about for different occasions. At the front of the nave is the  pulpit  where the priest  preach es (these talks are called " sermon s"). There is also a  lectern  (like a large  music stand ) from where the lessons (the  Bible  readings) are read.

If there are aisles along the side of the nave there will be  column pillars  which hold up the roof. In large churches or cathedrals there may be a row of little arches along the top of these pillars. This is called the  triforium . Over the triforium is the  clerestory  which is a row of windows high up in the church wall.

The chancel is the most holy part of the church, and this is why it is often separated from the nave by a screen which can be made of wood or stone, or occasionally iron. The congregation can see through the screen. On the top of the screen there may be a cross. This is called a rood (pronounce like "rude") screen. Priests used to climb up a staircase to the top of the rood screen to read the  epistle  and the  gospel . Sometimes people sang from there.

Inside the chancel are the benches where the  Choir (music) choir  sit. These are called  choir stalls . They are on both sides. The two sides of the choir sit facing one another. The choir members who sit on the left (north side) are called "cantoris" (the side where the " Cantor (church) cantor " sits) and those on the right (south side) are called "decani" (the side where the  deacon  sits). In some large churches or cathedrals the seats for the priests tip up. The top of these seats, when they are tipped up, are called  misericords  (from the Latin word for "mercy"). This is because the priests or monks were able to lean against them when they got tired if they had to stand up for a long time.

Sometimes there are holes in the walls of the screen so that the congregation can see through. These are called  squints . If there is a recess in the wall it is called an  aumbry . It is a cupboard for  Eucharist communion   wine  that has been blessed by a priest.

The altar may be right at the east end of the church, but in larger churches or cathedrals it is often much farther forward. In that case the very east end is called an  apse . Sometimes it is a separate chapel called the "Lady Chapel".

  Churches through the ages  

The design of churches changed a lot during the course of history. Often churches were made bigger. When this happened there may be a mixture of architectural styles. These styles vary a lot in different countries.

  English churches  

In  England English  churches there were several different periods of architecture:

  The  Saxon architecture Saxon  period ( 7th century 700 - 1050 ) was a time when churches were very simple. The end of the church (end of the sanctuary) was often rounded. Hardly any are left now because they were mostly made of  wood .
  The  Norman architecture Norman  period ( 1050 - 1190 ) came from the style called  Romanesque architecture Romanesque  which was popular in Europe. The arches had ornaments which were called "mouldings". The tops of the pillars looked like  cushion s, so they were called "cushion capitals". The windows were narrow and rounded at the top.
   Early English architecture Early English  or  Gothic architecture  ( 1190 - 1280 ) was not as solid and heavy as Norman architecture. Towers were elegant and tall, like the tower of  Salisbury Cathedral .
  The  Decorated architecture Decorated  style of architecture ( 1280 - 1360 )was popular at a time when the  plague  (Black Death) was raging and a third of the people in England died. For that reason, not so much building was done then. There were lots of stone carvings were made in churches at that time.
  The  Perpendicular architecture Perpendicular  style ( 1360 - 1540 ) was very grand. It had lots of straight upward lines and  fan vaulting . This can be seen in  Westminster Abbey  and  King's College Chapel, Cambridge . Many churches that can be seen in England were built in this period.

In the 1600s, churches were built in a variety of styles. Often they copied some of the older styles. After the  Great Fire of London  many new churches were built by the architect Sir  Christopher Wren . They were built in the classical style. Churches continued to be built in later centuries like this, but also the Gothic style continued to be used.

Modern churches often do not have the traditional cross-shape. It is difficult for the congregation to see and hear what is happening in the chancel. Modern churches bring the congregation, choir and priests in closer touch. An example is the round design for the  Church of Christ the Cornerstone, Milton Keynes Church of Christ the Cornerstone  in  Milton Keynes . Modern churches are often simpler but with a warmer character than the Gothic churches. Many have beautiful  mosaic  glass windows.  Coventry Cathedral  is a famous example of a modern church building.

 Related pages 
 Cathedral 
 Chapel 
 Choir (music) 

  References  
 reflist 
  Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1973 ISBN 0-85229-099-3

 Commons 
  Other websites  
   http://www.ortodoksi.net/virtuaalikirkko/index.html Virtual Church 

 Category:Churches  