Paper

File:InternationalPaper6413.jpg right|frame| International Paper  is the world's largest pulp and paper maker 
 File:Gutenberg bible Old Testament Epistle of St Jerome.jpg thumb|right|250px|Before about 1820, most printed books used  wikt:rag rag  paper, usually made from waste cotton rags 
 File:Manuscripts in the Yunnan Nationalities Museum - DSC03947.JPG thumb|right|250px|Dai scripture on  mulberry -bark paper, Yunnan, China 
 File:Papyrus.jpg thumb|right|250px|Writing on  papyrus 
 File:Ruins of the guard tower.jpg thumb|right|220px|Ruins of a watchtower on the  Great Wall of China : see "first paper" 

Modern  paper  is a thin  material  of (mostly)  wood fibre s pressed together. People write on paper, and  book s are made of paper. Paper can absorb  liquid s such as  water , so people can clean things with paper.

The  pulp and paper industry  comprises companies that use wood as raw material and produce  Pulp (paper) pulp , paper, board and other cellulose-based products.

  Paper making  
Modern paper is normally made from  wood   wikt:pulp pulp . ref cite book page 3 title The Quantum Universe: everything that can happen does happen publisher Allen Lane date 2011 first1 Brian first2 Jeff last1 Cox last2 Forshaw isbn 978-1-846-14432-5 ref  Wood is ground up and mixed with  water  and other  chemical s to make a thin liquid called "paper pulp". Paper pulp can be  Sodium hypochlorite bleached  to make paper more white, and  dye s can be added to make colored paper. This pulp is pressed into  wikt:sheet sheets  of paper. Printing is often done on paper before the paper is cut into sheets. Newsprint paper (newspaper) comes in a huge roll, and goes through the printing process as one continuous sheet. It is cut by a machine-driven  guillotine  blade later. Folding comes last, then packing for distribution. 

Sometimes paper is made heavier and more glossy (shiny) by adding  clay , and by 'milling' it. Milling is done by  wikt:squeeze squeezing  the paper through a series of rollers. Sometimes paper is made from used or waste paper: this is  recycling .

Not all paper is made from wood. Other kinds of fiber can be used. People still make paper from  cotton ,  linen  and  hemp  for special purposes.

  History of paper  
 Writing  started long before the invention of paper. People wrote on many kinds of material. They wrote on cloth, on stone walls, on wood. In  Mesopotamia  the  Sumer ians wrote on  clay  tablets, many of which have survived today. In Europe, people wrote on  vellum .

  First paper  
Many  century centuries  ago - as early as the  3rd millennium BC  (that's over 2000 BC) - people in  Egypt  made a kind of paper from the  papyrus  plant. ref name Skeat http://www-user.uni-bremen.de/~wie/Egerton/BellSkeat2.html H. Idris Bell and T.C. Skeat, 1935. "Papyrus and its uses"  ( British Museum  pamphlet). ref  This is where the word 'paper' comes from. The people of  Greece  and  Rome  learned to do this too. The Romans wrote on  parchment  (made from animal skin), on  wax ed tablets and on wood (see  Vindolanda ).

In  China  105 AD, the  eunuch   Cai Lun  told his Emperor he had made paper. They had previously used  bamboo  and  silk . ref Han dynasty 206BC-220 AD. ref ref name Carter Carter, Thomas Francis 1925.  The invention of printing in China and its spread westward . Columbia N.Y. ref  The material used in this ancient paper included  cotton   wikt:rag rags ,  hemp , various plant fibres and old  Fishing net fish nets . The oldest existing paper with writing on it was found in the ruins of a watchtower in the  Great Wall of China . It dates to about 150 AD. ref name Carter sup p5 sup ref Stein, M. Aurel 1921.  Serindia . London 1921. ref ref Papermaking. 2007. In:  Encyclopedia Britannica , from  Encyclopedia Britannica Online . ref  Even earlier paper (but with no writing on it) has been claimed: "The oldest surviving piece of paper in the world is made of hemp fibers, discovered in 1957 in a tomb near Xian, China, and dates from between the years 140 and 87 BC". ref Temple, Robert 1986.  The genius of China: 3,000 Years of science, discovery, and invention . Simon and Schuster, New York. ref  Paper-making was regarded by the Chinese as so valuable that they kept it secret as long as they could.

  Spread of paper  
People in  Japan  learned how to make paper with fibres of the  mulberry  tree, around 610 AD. This is called Japanese paper or  Washi . The Chinese invention spread to  India , and then to the  Middle East , and then to  Italy .

An opportunity occurred after The Battle of Talas in 751. Then an  Arab  army captured soldiers of the Chinese. There were some paper makers among the captured soldiers. From them, paper-making spread throughout the  Islamic world .  In 757, a paper mill was built at  Samarkand . People learned to use  linen  as paper raw material and to use starch made from  flour  as an additive.

The  Italy Italians  used  hemp  and  linen  rags. In 1276 the first Italian paper mill was built at  Fabriano  and, until the 14 century, Italy was a paper supplier in Europe. In 1282 the first  watermark  was introduced in  Bologna .

  Machine-made paper  
Paper was hard to make. It was cheaper than the old writing materials, but still expensive. A mechanical paper maker was conceived in  France  1798, but invented in  England . At least one  paper mill  was using them by 1812. ref Hunter, Dard 1978.  Paper-making: the history and technique of an ancient craft . Courier Dover ref ref Munsell, Joe 2009 [reprint of 1870 4th ed].  A chronology of paper and paper-making . Albany. ref  Now the process was cheaper but the  raw material  was still expensive.

In 1840 Friedrich Gottlob Keller Invented a machine that could make pulp for paper out of  wood  fibres (instead of the expensive rag paper). Paper became cheap enough for everyone to buy. Around the same time, other  invention s were made, like the  pencil , the  fountain pen , and a  printing press  that used  steam power . With this new  information technology , people wrote more letters, made more books and  newspaper s, and kept more records of what they did.

Today, some of the largest paper-producing countries are  China ,  USA ,  Canada ,  Finland ,  Sweden  and  Russia . Paper is produced in large factories called  paper mills . They produce hundreds of thousands of tons of paper each year.

  Uses of paper  
 File:Making Paper.gif thumb|right|200px|Making Chinese paper 

Paper is used for  write writing  and  wikt:print printing . Books,  magazine s and  newspaper s are printed on paper.

Paper is often used for  money . Paper used for money is often made in very special ways, to make it hard for people to print their own money. A piece of paper money is called a  banknote , a bill or a note.

Paper can be used for cleaning. Special forms of paper are used, such as  paper towel s,  facial tissue s or  toilet paper .

Pretty paper can be used as  decoration . It can be pasted onto the walls of a room; this is called  wallpaper . Paper can be used to wrap gifts. This is called  wrapping paper  or  gift wrap .

Some kinds of paper are strong and can be used in  box es and other  container packaging   material . Sometimes several layers of paper are held together with  glue , to make  cardboard .

 Related pages 
   Paper size 
   Cardboard 

  References  
 Reflist 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Paper   
 Category:Writing tools