Outer space

File:LH 95.jpg thumb|right|A  star  forming region in the  Large Magellanic Cloud , perhaps the closest galaxy to Earth's  Milky Way 
 File:1000px-Atmosphere layers-en.PNG thumb|200px|The boundaries between the Earth's surface and outer space, at the  Karman line ,  Convert 100 km mi abbr on  and  exosphere  at  Convert 690 km mi abbr on . Not to scale.|alt=A dark blue shaded diagram subdivided by horizontal lines, with the names of the five atmospheric regions arranged along the left. From bottom to top, the troposphere section shows Mount Everest and an airplane icon, the stratosphere displays a weather balloon, the mesosphere shows meteors, and the thermosphere includes an aurora and the Space Shuttle. At the top, the exosphere shows only stars. 

 Space , also known as  outer space , is the near- vacuum  between  Astronomical object celestial bodies . ref cite book title Collins Dictionary of Astronomy publisher HarperCollins date 2012 origyear 2006 edition Fifth first1 John last1 Daintith first2 William last2 Gould isbn 9780007918485 page 414 ref  It is where everything (all of the  planet s,  star s,  galaxy galaxies  and other objects) is found.

On  Earth , space begins at the  Karman line  (100 km above  sea level ). ref citation title Where does space start? newspaper All About Space publisher Imagine Publishing issue 1 page 84 date 2012-06-28 ref  This is where  Atmosphere of Earth Earth's atmosphere  is said to stop and outer space begins.  This is not a natural boundary but is a  wikt:convention convention  used by scientists and diplomats.

However, the space near Earth is quite crowded by astronomical standards. A list of spaces goes like this:
 Geospace  is the region of outer space near Earth. Geospace includes the upper region of the atmosphere and the  magnetosphere . ref Schrijver, Carolus J. & Siscoe, George L. 2010.  Heliophysics: evolving solar activity and the climates of Space and Earth . Cambridge University Press, p363. ISBN 0-521-11294-X ref   The  Van Allen radiation belt  lies within the geospace. The space inside the magnetosphere is protected from  radiation  from the Sun. It has a low level of electrically charged particles.
 Interplanetary space  is the space around the Sun and planets of the  Solar System . It has  the  solar wind , a continuous stream of charged particles from the Sun. This stream creates a very thin atmosphere (the  heliosphere ) for  billion s of miles or kilometers into space.  br Interplanetary space has the  magnetic field  generated by the Sun. ref Papagiannis, Michael D. 1972.  Space physics and space astronomy . Taylor & Francis, 12-149. ISBN 0-677-04000-8 ref   Planets such as  Jupiter ,  Saturn ,  Mercury (planet) Mercury  and the Earth also have  magnetosphere s.  These magnetic fields can trap particles from the solar wind and other sources, creating belts of magnetic particles such as the Van Allen radiation belt. Planets without magnetic fields, such as  Mars , have their atmospheres gradually stripped off by the solar wind. ref Johnson R.E. 1994. Plasma-induced sputtering of an atmosphere.  Space Science Reviews   69  (3-4): 215-253.  http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2FBF02101697 ref 
 Interstellar space  is the physical space within a galaxy not occupied by stars or their planetary systems. It continues to the edges of the galaxy, where it fades into the  Void (astronomy) intergalactic void . Most of the mass in this space is made up of single  hydrogen  atoms, fewer  helium  atoms and a few heavier atoms formed in stars.  Supernova e blow some of their atoms huge distances.  br A number of molecules and tiny 0.1 mm dust particles do exist in interstellar space. ref Rauchfuss, Horst 2008.  Chemical evolution and the origin of life . transl. T.N. Mitchell. Springer, p101. ISBN 3-540-78822-0 ref  About four new types of molecule are discovered each year. Large regions of higher density matter known as  molecular cloud s allow  chemical reaction s to occur. This incudes organic polyatomic species. Much of this chemistry is driven by  collision s.
 Intergalactic space  does have 'cosmic  void (astronomy) voids ' between the large-scale structures of the  universe .

  Exploration  
 main Space exploration 
Exploring space is very difficult because it contains no air and is so large that even the fastest ships can only explore a tiny part of it. It takes 3 days of traveling to reach the Moon and, depending on speed, it would take a long time to reach the closest star  Proxima Centauri . 

Manned  spacecraft  are designed to keep good air inside them and to protect  astronaut s from extreme temperatures.

We gain most of our information about the items in space from different kinds of  telescope s. Some of them are  Space observatory space telescopes , put in outer space for a better view.  Space probe s also explore  planet s,  comet s and other space objects that are not too far.  

  Related pages  
   Space-time 
   Black hole 
   Galaxy 
   Universe 
   Astronomy 

  References  
 reflist 

  Other websites  
   http://en.citizendium.org/wiki/Outer_space Outer Space  -Citizendium

 Category:Astrophysics 
 Category:Space