Mosque

good 
 File:Sultan Ahmed Mosque, Istambul.jpg thumb|right|200px|The  Sultan Ahmed Mosque (Istanbul) Sultan Ahmed Mosque  in  Istanbul . 
 File:Egypt.Aswan.Mosque.01.jpg thumb|right|200px|Mosque;  Aswan ,  Egypt A mosque is a place where  Muslim s  worship . ref cite book title GCSE Religious Studies: Complete Revision and Practice publisher Coordination Group Publications isbn 9781847624062 edition Revised date 2009 page 96 ref  The word  mosque  comes from the  Arabic language Arabic  word  masjid . ref lang-ar  msjd  --  pronounced 'maesdZId , plural  masajid ,  lang-ar  msjd  --  IPA /mae'sae:dZId/ ref  . A larger, 'collective', mosque is called a  masjid jami . ref lang-ar  msjd jm` ,  masjid jami' . ref  Larger mosques offer more  service s to their  community . 

For many Muslim people, a mosque is more than a place of worship. Muslims worship, study and discuss  Islam , and do many other things in a mosque and its compounds. In the  United Kingdom , many mosques are used as community centres. They are also used to teach about Islam. Religious  festival s and gatherings are held in mosques. Weddings are one example. Mosques have rules to control what people do inside. One of these rules is that it is considered rude to disturb another person who is worshipping. 

Many mosques are known for their  Islamic architecture . The earliest mosques, opened in  7th century  were open-air spaces. They are the  Quba Mosque  and  Masjid al-Nabawi .  Later Mosques were buildings that were specially designed. Nowadays, mosques are in every  continent , except  Antarctica .

The mosque played a major part in the spread of education in the Muslim World, and the association of the mosque with education remained one of its main characteristics throughout history ref Cite book Islam   A.L. Tibawi: Islamic Education, Luzac and Company Ltd, London, 1972, p. 24 ref , and, the school became an indispensable appendage to the mosque ref Cite book Islam   S. P. Scott, History, op. cit., p.467. ref . From the earliest days of Islam, the mosque was the centre of the Muslim community, a place for prayer, meditation, religious instruction, political discussion, and a school. And anywhere Islam took hold, mosques were established, and basic religious and educational instruction began. Once established, mosques developed into well-known places of learning, often with hundreds, even thousands, of students, and frequently contained important libraries ref Cite book Mosque Role   J. Waardenburg: "Some Institutional Aspects of Muslim Higher Learning", NVMEN, 12/2 (April 1965): 96-138; p. 98. ref 

In Iraq, pharmacology, engineering, astronomy and other subjects were taught in the mosques of Baghdad, and students came from Syria, Persia and India to learn these sciences ref Cite book Islam   Al-Khuli: Dawr al-masajid, op. cit., p. 20, in M. Sibai, Mosque Libraries, op. cit. p. 30. ref . While at the Qarawiyin Mosque, there were courses on grammar, rhetoric, logic, mathematics, and astronomy ref Cite book Mosque role   R. Le Tourneau: Fes in the age of the Merinids, transl. from French by B. A. Clement, University of Oklahoma Press, 1961, p. 122. ref  , and possibly history, geography and chemistry ref Cite book Mosque   Ibid ref 

  Architecture  
 File:Jami-Ul-Alfar.jpg thumb|right|200px|The  Jami Ul Alfar  mosque in  Colombo ,  Sri Lanka , has striking Moorish and Colonial architecture with a candy-striped  facade . 
Many mosques are famous works of  architecture . They are often built in a style that has stayed the same for many centuries. Many mosques have prayer halls,  dome s, and  minaret s. They may also have a  courtyard . 

Mosques were first built on the  Arabian Peninsula . The Muslims who built them used old architectural styles. They also combined these styles in new ways. A major influence was the  palace s built during the  Parthia n and  Sassanid Empire Sassanid   dynasty dynasties  of  Persia . The  Sarvestan palace  from the Sassanid era is a good example of this. It has an  arch ed entrance and a central dome. These features already existed in  Persia  before Islam.

After the Arab invasion of Persia, the new style, with its Sassanid influence, was used for the new  Muslim Islamic world . Many forms of mosques have developed in different regions of the Islamic world. Important mosque types include the early  Abbasid Empire Abbasid  mosques, T-type mosques, and the central-dome mosques of  Anatolia . In the  20th century , many countries that grew rich from  Petroleum oil  paid for the building of many new mosques. The rulers of these countries often hired leading architects to design these mosques. They included non-Muslims.

  Arab plan  
 File:Cairo al-Azhar 7.jpg thumb|right|200px| Al Azhar Al Azhar Mosque  in Cairo, Egypt has a hypostyle hall  
Many early mosques have a square or  rectangle rectangular  plan. They also have a prayer hall and an enclosed courtyard. This is known as  Arab-plan . The first mosques of this type were built during the  Umayyad Dynasty .  

The flat  roof  of the prayer hall was supported by  column s. Many rows of columns were needed to support such roofs; ref name Masdjid1  this is called " Hypostyle hypostyle architecture ". One of the most famous hypostyle mosques is the  Mezquita de Cordoba  in  Spain . It is supported by over 850 columns. ref name mit-handout  

In the warm  Mediterranean  and Middle Eastern  climate s, the courtyard served to hold the large number of worshippers during Friday prayers. Often, hypostyle mosques have outer  Arcade (architecture) arcades . They allow the visitors to enjoy the  shade . Arab-plan mosques were built mostly during the Umayyad and  Abbasid  dynasties. The Arab plan was very simple, which did not allow for much further development. This caused that style of mosque to fall out of favour. ref name Masdjid1 cite encyclopedia   last   Hillenbrand  first   R   editor   P.J. Bearman, Th. Bianquis,  Clifford Edmund Bosworth C.E. Bosworth , E. van Donzel and W.P. Heinrichs   encyclopedia  Encyclopaedia of Islam  Online  title   Masdjid. I. In the central Islamic lands   publisher   Brill Academic Publishers   id    ISSN 1573-3912   ref 

  Central dome  
The  Ottoman Empire Ottomans  began building  central dome mosques  in the  15th century fifteenth century . These mosques have a large dome centered over the prayer hall. There may also be smaller domes, which are off-center over the prayer hall or the rest of the mosque. ref name mit-vocab cite web url http://ocw.mit.edu/OcwWeb/Architecture/4-614Religious-Architecture-and-Islamic-CulturesFall2002/LectureNotes/detail/vocab-islam.htm#islam6   accessdate 2006-04-09  title Vocabulary of Islamic Architecture  publisher Massachusetts Institute of Technology ref  This style was heavily influenced by the  Byzantine   religious architecture  with its use of central domes. ref name Masdjid1 

  Iwan  
 Iwan mosques  are famous for their domed rooms and  iwan s . Iwans are spaces with an arched roof. They have an opening at one end. One or more iwans face a central courtyard that serves as the prayer hall. The style borrows from pre-Islamic Iranian architecture. Most mosques with this style are in  Iran .

  Parts of Mosques  
  Minarets  
 main Minaret 

 File:AleppoGreatMosque.jpg thumb|right|200px|The Great Mosque in  Aleppo ,  Syria . The tower-like structure is the minaret. 
Most mosques have minarets. Minarets are tall  tower s. Usually they are at one of the corners of the mosque. The top of the minaret is the highest point in the mosque, and usually the highest point in the area around the mosque. The tallest minaret in the world is in the  Hassan II Mosque  in  Casablanca ,  Morocco . ref cite book title Call to Prayer: My Travels in Spain, Portugal and Morocco  last Walters  first Brian  date May 17 ,  2004   publisher Virtualbookworm Publishing  isbn 1-58939-592-1  pages 14  chapter The Prophet's People  quote Its 210-meter minaret is the tallest in the world ref 

The first mosques had no minarets. The most  conservatism conservative  Islamic groups, like  Wahhabism Wahhabis , still avoid building minarets. They see them as simply a fancy decoration and unnecessary. The first minaret was built in 665 in  Basra  during the  reign  of the  Umayyad   caliph   Muawiyah I . Muawiyah encouraged the building of minarets, as they were supposed to be the same as  bell tower s on  Christian   church es. Because of this, mosque architects used the shape of the bell tower for their minarets. Both the minaret and the bell tower serve the same purpose -- to call the faithful to prayer. ref name Manara cite encyclopedia   last   Hillenbrand  first   R   editor   P.J. Bearman, Th. Bianquis,  Clifford Edmund Bosworth C.E. Bosworth , E. van Donzel and W.P. Heinrichs   encyclopedia  Encyclopaedia of Islam  Online  title   Manara, Manar   publisher   Brill Academic Publishers   id   ISSN 1573-3912 ref 

Before the five required daily prayers, a  muezzin  calls the worshippers to  salat prayer  from the minaret. In many countries like Singapore where Muslims are not the majority, mosques are stopped from loudly playing the call to prayer. The main problem is the use of  electronics electronic  amplification of the call, which is now widely used by mosques.

  Domes  
 File:Khatem Al Anbiyaa Mosque Detail.jpg thumb|right|200px|The domes of the Khatem Al Anbiyaa Mosque in  Beirut ,  Lebanon 

The  dome s were often placed directly above the main prayer hall. They represent the universe that Allah created. ref cite book title Symmetries of Nature: A Handbook for Philosophy of Nature and Science  last Mainzer  first Klaus  date June 1 ,  1996 isbn 3-11-012990-6  pages 124  chapter Art and Architecture  quote the dome arching over the believers like the spherical dome of the sky ref  At first, these domes were small. They only took up a small part of the roof near the  mihrab . Later, they took the whole roof above the prayer hall. 
Domes normally have the shape of a  hemisphere . The  Mughal Empire Mughals  in  India  popularized  onion -shaped domes in  South Asia  and  Persia . ref cite book title Architecture of Mughal India  last Asher  first Catherine B.  date  1992 publisher Cambridge University Press  pages 256  isbn 0-521-26728-5  chapter Aurangzeb and the Islamization of the Mughal style ref  Some mosques have several domes, as well as the main large dome. The other domes are often smaller.

Domes would help the  imam  be heard, as the sound waves would bounce in and then out of the dome making the voice louder.

  Prayer hall  
All mosques have a  prayer  hall, which is also called  musalla . Normally, there is no  furniture  in it except for prayer  wikt:mat mats  or  rug s. These are necessary, as Islamic prayer is usually done  knee ling. 

Some mosques have  Arabic calligraphy  and  Qur'an ic  verses on the walls to help worshipers focus on the beauty of Islam and its holiest book, the  Qur'an , as well as for decoration. ref name teach-islam cite book title Teach Yourself Islam  last Maqsood  first Ruqaiyyah Waris  isbn 0-07-141963-2  date 2003-04-22   edition 2nd edition  publisher McGraw-Hill  pages 57-8, 72-5, 112-120  location Chicago ref 

The  qiblah  wall  is usually at the other side of the entrance to the prayer hall. This wall is specially decorated. In a properly sited mosque, it will be set  wikt:perpendicular perpendicular  to a line leading to  Mecca . ref cite book title Writing Signs: Fatimid Public Text  date 1998-12-16   last Bierman  first Irene A.  publisher University of California Press  pages 150  isbn 0-520-20802-1 ref  People pray in rows parallel to the  qiblah  wall. They arrange themselves so they face  Mecca . In the  qiblah  wall, usually at its center, is the  mihrab , a niche or depression showing the direction of  Mecca . The  mihrab  serves as the place where the  imam  leads the five daily prayers. ref cite web url http://www.ioc.u-tokyo.ac.jp/~islamarc/WebPage1/htm_eng/index/keyword1_e.htm   accessdate 2006-04-09  title Terms 1: Mosque  publisher University of Tokyo Institute of Oriental Culture ref 

 File:Mosque in bourke cemetery nsw australia.jpg thumb|right|200px|A simple mosque in the  Australian   outback  is different from the grand designs of older Islamic communities.  Bourke, New South Wales Bourke  cemetery, New South Wales. 

  Washing (wudhu)  
All people must wash themselves before they pray. Mosques often have  fountain s or other facilities for washing in their entrances or courtyards, so that people can perform the washing  ritual  before prayer.
At very small mosques, worshippers may use restrooms for their ritual washing, or wu'du. In traditional mosques, there is often a building specially for washing. This is often in the center of the courtyard. ref name mit-handout cite web url http://web.mit.edu/4.614/www/handout02.html   accessdate 2006-04-09  publisher Massachusetts Institute of Technology  title Religious Architecture and Islamic Cultures ref  In the prayer halls, people must not wear shoes for much the same reason. ref name Abudhabitourism cite web url http://www.abudhabitourism.ae/en/info/sheikh.zayed.mosque.aspx title Dress and Behaviour Code for the Sheikh Zayed Mosque publisher Abu Dhabi Tourism Authority ref ref name islamqa cite web url http://www.islamqa.com/en/ref/69793 title Praying in shoes in a mosque where there are carpets ref 

  Modern features  
Modern mosques should appeal to the community they serve. For this reason, other facilities may also be available at the mosque, like  clinic health clinics ,  library libraries , and  gym sports halls. 

  The inside of mosques  
 gallery 
Image:Inside Shah Faisal Mosque.jpg|Inside the [[Shah Faisal Mosque]] in [[Islamabad]], [[Pakistan]]
Image:Cairo Sulayman Pasha 3.jpg|Inside the [[Sulayman Pasha Mosque]] in [[Cairo]], [[Egypt]]
Image:Nasr ol Molk mosque inside colorful.jpg|The [[Nasr ol Molk Mosque]] in [[Shiraz]], [[Iran]]
 gallery 
There may be decorative  tile s,  plaster  or coloured  mosaic s on the walls. There are no pictures or statues.

  Religious functions  
  Prayers  
 File:Mosque.jpg thumb|right|200px|Muslims performing  salat  at the  Umayyad Mosque 

Adult Muslims are expected to pray five times a day. Most mosques have formal prayers for each of these times. If performing the prayer is difficult, for example for  ill  people, then exceptions are made.  

Mosques also hold a special prayer service, called  jumuah . This is done once a week. It is a form of  Sabbath  and replaces the Friday prayers at the mosque. Daily prayers can be done anywhere. However, Muslims are expected to do their Friday prayer at the mosque. ref name teach-islam cite book title Teach Yourself Islam  last Maqsood  first Ruqaiyyah Waris  isbn 0-07-141963-2  date April 22 ,  2003   edition 2nd edition  publisher McGraw-Hill  pages 57-8, 72-5, 112-120  location Chicago ref 

When a Muslim dies, a funeral prayer is normally held. It is held outdoors in a courtyard or square close to the mosque. The prayers have all the worshippers present, including the imam, taking part. ref cite web url http://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/law/fiqhussunnah/fus4_62.html   title Fiqh-us-Sunnah, Volume 4: Funeral Prayers (Salatul Janazah) publisher University of Southern California  work Compendium of Muslim Texts  accessdate 2006-04-16 ref  During  eclipse s, mosques will host special prayers called  Sunnah salat#Qusuf and Khusuf eclipse prayers . ref cite web url http://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/fundamentals/hadithsunnah/bukhari/018.sbt.html   title Eclipses  publisher University of Southern California  work Compendium of Muslim Texts  accessdate 2006-04-16 ref 

There are two large holidays ( Eids ) in the  Islamic calendar . During these days, there are special prayers at mosques in the morning. Larger mosques will normally hold them for their own communities as well as the people from smaller local mosques. Mosques, especially those in countries where Muslims are the majority, will also host  Eid  prayers outside in courtyards or  town square s. ref cite web url http://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/fundamentals/pillars/prayer/Eid-Prayers_1.html   accessdate 2006-04-08  title 'Id Prayers (Salatul 'Idain)  publisher University of Southern California  work Compendium of Muslim Texts ref 
 File:Abdul Rahman Mosque in March 2010.jpg thumb|right|200px|A mosque in  Afghanistan 

  Ramadan events  
 see also Ramadan 
There are many events in  Ramadan , Islam's holiest month. During  Ramadan , Muslims must  fasting fast  during the day. Mosques organise  iftar  dinners after sunset. These are done after the fourth required prayer of the day. Part of the food is given by members of the community, which creates nightly  potluck  dinners. The community contribution to these dinners is required. For this reason, mosques with smaller communities may not be able to hold the  iftar  dinners daily. 

Some mosques will also hold meals in the morning before  dawn . Mosques will often invite poorer members of the community to these meals. Islam sees giving  charity (practice) charity  during Ramadan as good acts. ref cite web url http://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/fundamentals/pillars/fasting/tajuddin/fast_51.html  accessdate 2006-04-17  title Charity  publisher University of Southern California  work Compendium of Muslim Texts ref 

Larger mosques sometimes offer special, optional prayers. They are done after the last required prayer of the day. During each night of prayers, one member of the community who has memorized the entire  Qur'an  will recite a part of the book. It can last for up to two hours. ref name teach-islam  Sometimes, several such people (not necessarily of the local community) take turns to do this. During the last ten days of Ramadan, larger mosques will host all-night programs to observe  Laylat al-Qadr . It is the night Muslims believe that the  Prophets of Islam Islamic prophet   Muhammad  first received Qur'anic revelations. ref name teach-islam  On that night, between  sunset  and  sunrise , mosques employ speakers to teach the worshipers about Islam. Mosques or the community usually provide meals at times through the night.
 File:AlAbbasMosque01.jpg thumb|right|right|200px|The  Al Abbas Mosque Al-'Abbas Mosque  in  Karbala ,  Iraq  is visited by millions of  Shia  pilgrims each year. 

  Political functions  
 File:Mesquita de Cuiaba.jpg thumb|right|right|200px|Mosque in  Cuiaba ,  Brazil 
During the late twentieth century, more and more mosques have been used for  political  purposes. Modern-day mosques in the Western world want to educate good citizens. The details differ greatly from mosque to mosque and from country to country.

  Advocacy  
Countries with small Muslim populations use mosques as a way to support civic participation. They are more likely to do this than Muslim-majority countries of the  Greater Middle East . ref name tc cite web url http://www.tc.edu/muslim-nyc/research/projects/role%20of%20muslims.html   publisher Teachers' College - Columbia University  title The Role of Mosques in the civic and political incorporation of Muslim America  last Jamal  first Amany  accessdate 2006-04-22 ref  American mosques host  voter registration  and civic participation drives. In the United States, Muslims are often  migration immigrants , or the children of immigrants. Mosques want to interest these people for politics. They also want to keep them informed about issues that concern the Muslim community. People who attend the services at the mosque regularly are more likely to take part in  protest s, to sign  petition s, and to involve themselves in political matters. ref name tc 

A link between  Ideology political views  and mosque attendance can still be seen in other parts of the world. ref cite web title Study: Islam devotion not linked to terror url http://www.umich.edu/~urecord/0405/Jun13_05/03.shtml publisher The University Record Online  last Swanbrow  first Diane  date 2005-06-23  accessdate 2007-02-24 ref  After the  al-Askari Mosque bombing (2006) al-Askari Mosque bombing  in February 2006, imams and other Islamic leaders used mosques and  jumuah Friday prayers  to call for calm and peace during the widespread  violence . ref cite news url http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/4747886.stm   date 2006-02-24  accessdate 2006-04-23  title Friday prayer plea for Iraq calm  publisher BBC ref 

Beginning in the late twentieth century and continuing into the early twenty-first century, a small number of mosques have also become a base for extremist imams to support  terrorism  and  Islamic fundamentalism extreme Islamic ideals .  Finsbury Park Mosque  in  London  is a mosque that has been used in this manner.

  Social conflict  

 see also Babri Masjid Islamophobia Israeli-Palestinian conflict 

Like other places of worship, mosques can be at the center of social  conflict s. 

 Babri Mosque  was the centre of such a conflict up until the early 1990s when it was  wikt:demolish demolished . Before a solution could be found, the mosque was destroyed by about 200,000 Hindus. It took place on 6 December 1992. The mosque was built by  Babur  to mark the birthplace of  Rama Ram . It was believed to be on a site of an earlier  Hindu temple . ref cite news title Flashpoint Ayodhya  url http://www.archaeology.org/0407/abstracts/ayodhya.html   date July/August 2004  publisher Archaeology  last Romey  first Kristen M. ref  The conflict over the mosque was directly linked to  Bombay Riots rioting in Bombay  (present-day  Mumbai ) as well as  1993 Mumbai bombings bombings in 1993  that killed 257 people.

In February 2006,  al-Askari Mosque bombing (2006) a bombing  seriously damaged Iraq's  Al Askari Mosque al-Askari Mosque . This increased the existing tensions. The conflict between two Muslim groups in Iraq had already led to other bombings. However mosque bombings are not limited to Iraq. In June 2005, a  suicide attack suicide bomber  killed at least 19 people at an  Afghanistan Afghan  mosque. ref cite news url http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/06/01/AR2005060100263.html   date 2006-06-02  accessdate 2006-04-23  title Suicide Bomber Kills 20 in Afghan Mosque  publisher The Washington Post  page A16  last Aizenman  first N.C. ref  In April 2006, there were  2006 Jama Masjid explosions two explosions  at  India 's  Jama Masjid .

After the  September 11, 2001 attacks September 11 attacks , several American mosques were targets of attacks. These ranged from simple  vandalism  to  arson . ref 
 cite web  url http://www.indypressny.org/nycma/voices/255/briefs/briefs_1/ 
 title NYCMA Voices That Must Be Heard: Continued attacks on mosques and Muslim-owned businesses alarm Muslim Americans  publisher www.indypressny.org
 accessdate 2009-04-27  last 
 first   ref 

The  Jewish Defense League  was suspected of plotting to bomb the  King Fahd Mosque, Culver City King Fahd Mosque  in  Culver City, California . ref cite news url http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,40693,00.html   title JDL Chairman, Follower Accused of Plotting to Bomb Mosque, Congressman  publisher Associated Press via FOX News  date 2001-12-13  accessdate 2006-04-23 ref  There were similar attacks in the  United Kingdom  after the  7 July 2005 London bombings . Outside the  Western world , in June 2001, the  Hassan Bek Mosque  was the target of attacks. The attacks involved hundreds of  Israel is angry at  Arab s for a previous attack. ref cite news url http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/1366719.stm   title Arafat orders immediate ceasefire  date 2001-06-03  accessdate 2006-04-23  publisher BBC ref ref cite news last Harris first John title Paranoia, poverty and wild rumours - a journey through BNP country url http://politics.guardian.co.uk/farright/story/0,,1758974,00.html date 2006-04-22 publisher The Guardian accessdate 2006-05-28 ref ref cite news url http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/12927212/   title Italians fear mosque plans  last Carlile  first Jennifer  date 2006-05-25  accessdate 2006-05-28  publisher MSNBC ref 

  Saudi influence  
 see also Wahhabism 
 Saudia Arabia Saudi  involvement in building mosques around the world only goes back to the 1960s. ref name money-trails cite news url http://www.washingtonpost.com/ac2/wp-dyn/A13266-2004Aug18   title U.S. Eyes Money Trails of Saudi-Backed Charities  date 2004-08-19  accessdate 2007-02-24 last Ottoway  first David B.  page A1  publisher The Washington Post ref 
In the 1980s, the Saudi Arabian government began to pay for the building of mosques in countries around the world. An estimated  United States dollar US$ 45 billion has been spent by the Saudi Arabian government for mosques and Islamic schools in foreign countries.  Ain al-Yaqeen , a Saudi newspaper, reported in 2002 that Saudi money may have helped to build as many as 1,500 mosques and 2,000 other Islamic centers. ref cite web url http://www.usnews.com/usnews/news/articles/031215/15terror.htm   title The Saudi Connection  date 2003-12-15  accessdate 2006-04-17  last Kaplan  first David E.  publisher U.S. News and World Report ref   Saudi  citizens have also given a lot of money to mosques in the Islamic world, especially in countries where they see Muslims as poor and oppressed. Following the fall of the  Soviet Union , in 1992, mosques in  Afghanistan  received money from Saudi citizens. ref name money-trails  The King Fahd Mosque in  Culver City, California  and the Islamic  Cultural center Cultural Center  of Italy in  Rome  are two of Saudi Arabia's largest investments in foreign mosques as former Saudi king  Faud of Saudi Arabia Fahd bin Abdul Aziz al-Saud  gave  United States dollar US$ 8 million ref name money-trails  and  United States dollar US$ 50 million ref cite web url http://www.kingfahdbinabdulaziz.com/main/m4506.htm   accessdate 2006-04-17  publisher King Fahd bin Abdul Aziz  title Islamic Center in Rome, Italy ref  to the two mosques, respectively.

  Rules and behaviour in mosques  
 File:Bayt al Mukarram.jpg thumb|right|200px| Baitul Mukarram  (Dhaka), the National Mosque of  Bangladesh  

The structure resembles the  Kaaba  in  Mecca . 

In a mosque, people should keep focused on worshiping  Allah . For this reason, there are a number of rules about the correct behaviour in a mosque. Some of these rules are the same all over the world, such as no shoes should be worn in the prayer hall. Other rules are different from mosque to mosque.

  Prayer leader  
It is generally seen as good to have someone who leads the prayers, though this is not strictly necessary. ref name mawardi112 cite book   last Abu al-Hasankok
Ibn Muhammad Ibn Habib  first Al-Mawardi  author Al-Mawardi   title The Ordinances of Government ( Al-Ahkam al-Sultaniyya w'al-Wilayat al-Diniyya )   publisher Garnet Publishing   location Lebanon   year 2000   isbn 1-85964-140-7 pages 184 ref  The person who usually leads the prayers is called  imam . He must be a free and honest man. He should also be an authority when it comes to answering questions on religion. ref name mawardi112  In mosques that were built or that are kept up by the government, the imam is selected by the ruler. ref name mawardi112  In private mosques, the community selects the imam, through  majority rule majority voting . 

 File:Spain Andalusia Cordoba BW 2015-10-27 13-54-14.jpg thumb|Interior of the  Mezquita , a  hypostyle  former mosque with columns arranged in grid pattern, in  Cordoba, Spain . 
Only men may lead prayers for men. ref name mawardi112   Women are allowed to lead prayers for congregations where there are only women.

  Attending a mosque  
In addition to washing, there are other rules that also apply to those who enter the mosque, even if they do not wish to pray there. It is forbidden to wear shoes in the  carpet ed area of the prayer hall. Some mosques also do not allow wearing shoes in other parts, even though these may not be devoted to praying. 

 Islam  requires that its believers wear  Islam and clothing clothes  that show  modesty . As a result, both men and women must follow this rule when they attend a mosque (though mosques may not always enforce the rules). Men are supposed to come to the mosque wearing loose and clean clothes that do not show the shape of the body. Similarly, women who come to the mosque are expected to wear loose clothing, shirts, pants that cover to the wrists and ankles and cover their heads such as with a  hijab . Many Muslims, regardless of their ethnic background, wear  Middle East Middle eastern  clothing associated with  Arab ic Islam to special occasions and prayers at mosques. ref name teach-islam 

Mosques are places of worship. For this reason, those inside the mosque should be respectful to those who are praying. Loud talking or discussion of topics that could be disrespectful, is forbidden in areas where people are praying. It is also considered as rude to walk in front of Muslims in prayer or otherwise disturb  them. ref cite paper author Connecting Cultures, Inc.  title Building Cultural Competency: understanding Islam, Muslims, and Arab culture  publisher Connecting Cultures, Inc.  url http://www.maec.org/2004conferencepapers/ismail.doc   page p. 15  format Doc  accessdate 2006-07-12 ref  

  Men and women pray in different parts  
 File:Islam in India.jpg thumb|right|200px| Muslims  praying in the male section of a mosque in  Srinagar ,  Jammu and Kashmir , India 

 Shari'a Islamic law  requires men and women to be separated in the prayer hall. Ideally, women should pray behind men.  Muhammad  said, women should pray at home, not at the mosque. Muhammad thought women should not be forbidden in mosques. The second  caliph   Umar I Umar  at one time stopped women from attending mosques, especially at night, because he feared they may be teased by males, so he made them to pray at home. ref cite web url http://www.usc.edu/dept/MSA/humanrelations/womeninislam/womeninsociety.html#mosque   accessdate 2006-04-15  title Women in Society  publisher University of Southern California  work Compendium of Muslim Texts  last Doi  first Abdur Rahman I. ref  Sometimes a special part of the mosque was railed off for women; for example, the governor of Mecca in 870 had ropes tied between the columns to make a separate place for women. ref name Masdjid1 

Many mosques today will put the women behind a barrier or partition or in another room. Mosques in  South Asia South  and  Southeast Asia  put men and women in separate rooms, as the divisions were built into them centuries ago. In nearly two-thirds of  United States of America American  mosques, women pray behind partitions or in separate areas, not in the main prayer hall; some mosques do not admit women at all. Although there are sections only for women and children, the  Masjid al-Haram Grand Mosque  in  Mecca  is desegregated. ref cite news url http://www.columbiajournalist.org/rw1_dinges/2005/article.asp?subj=national&course=rw1_dinges&id=624   accessdate 2006-04-09  date 2006-01-26  title Muslim women seek more equitable role in Mosques  last Rezk  first Rawya  publisher The Columbia Journalist ref 

  Non-Muslims in mosques  

A few scholars of  sharia Islamic law  believe that non-Muslims may be allowed into mosques, as long as they do not sleep or eat there. Followers of the  Maliki   madhhab school  of  fiqh Islamic jurisprudence  disagree. They say that non-Muslims may not be allowed into mosques at all. ref name mawardi112 

Different countries have different opinions on the question. Nearly all the mosques in the  Arabian Peninsula  as well as  Morocco  do not allow non-Muslims. The  Hassan II Mosque  in  Casablanca  is one of only two mosques in Morocco currently open to non-Muslims. ref cite web url http://edition.cnn.com/2003/TRAVEL/DESTINATIONS/02/25/morocco.travel.ap/index.html title Morocco travel publisher CNN accessdate 2006-09-22 ref  

In modern-day  Saudi Arabia , the Grand Mosque and all of  Mecca  are open only to Muslims. Likewise, the  Masjid al-Nabawi  and the city of  Medina  that surrounds it are also off-limits to those who do not practice Islam. ref cite book title Dictionary of Beliefs & Religions last Goring  first Rosemary  publisher Wordsworth Editions  date 1997-05-01  isbn 1-85326-354-0 ref  For mosques in other areas, it has most commonly been taken that non-Muslims may only enter mosques if granted permission to do so by Muslims and if they have a proper reason. ref name teach-islam 

In modern  Turkey  non-Muslim  tourist s are allowed to enter any mosque, but must obey the rules of  decorum . Visiting a mosque is allowed only between prayers; visitors must wear long trousers and take off their shoes; women must cover their heads; no photos; no loud talk is allowed. No references to other religions are allowed (no crosses on necklaces, no cross gestures etc.).

However, there are also many other places in the west as well as the Islamic world where non-Muslims are welcome to enter mosques. Most mosques in the  United States , for example, report receiving non-Muslim visitors every month. ref name mosquesinamerica Cite paper   coauthors Bagby, Ihsan; Perl, Paul M.; and Froehle, Bryan T.   title The Mosque in America: a national portrait   publisher Council on American-Islamic Relations   year 2001   url http://www.cair-net.org/mosquereport/Masjid_Study_Project_2000_Report.pdf   format PDF  accessdate 2006-04-17 ref  Many Mosques throughout the United States welcome non-Muslims as a sign of openness to the rest of the community and to encourage conversions to Islam. ref cite journal last Takim  first Liyakatali  month July  year 2004  title From Conversion to Conversation: Interfaith Dialogue in Post 9-11 America  journal The Muslim World  volume 94  pages 343-355  url http://macdonald.hartsem.edu/articles/mw943f.pdf   format PDF  accessdate 2006-06-16  doi 10.1111/j.1478-1913.2004.00058.x  Liyakatali Takim is a professor in the Department of Religious studies at the University of Denver ref ref cite news url http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/4511780.stm   publisher BBC  accessdate 2006-06-16  title Laptop link-up: A day at the mosque  date 2005-12-05 ref 

  Dogs  
Dogs are usually banned from entering mosques, but on 24 September 2008, the Muslim Law Council UK made special ruling, called a  fatwa , which granted a blind Muslim permission to take his guide dog into the mosque. ref cite web url http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/leicestershire/7633623.stm   title BBC NEWS   England   Leicestershire   Ruling allows guide dog in mosque  publisher News.bbc.co.uk  date 24 September 2008 accessdate 2008-11-03 ref 

  Mosques as hostels  
It is common for a smaller mosque to serve as a  hostel  for Muslims on  haj  ( pilgrimage  to Mecca). Sometimes mosques are used for  refugee s, or as temporary homes for homeless people.  Obligations to neighbours in Islam  are very strict, and specific. In the  Qur'an  Mohammed said that a person who helps others in the hour of need, and who helps the oppressed; that person God will help on the Day of Travail (agony). ref 
 cite web
 url http://muslim-canada.org/hadiths.html#Charity 
 title The Sayings of Muhammad by Allama Sir Abdullah Al- Mamun Al-Suhrawardy
 publisher muslim-canada.org
 accessdate 2009-04-25
 last Al-Suhrawardy
 first Abdullah Al- Mamun
 
 ref  There are other commands, such as helping the poor and being nice to people. An important part of being Muslim, or just being part of the mosque, is taking care of people who need help. A mosque is a social, as well as a religious, group.

A  madrassa  is a little different from a mosque. A madrassa focuses on teaching Islam, usually to children and young people.

  Mosques in Spain  
 File:Spain Andalusia Cordoba BW 2015-10-27 13-54-14.jpg thumb|right|200px|The  Mezquita de Cordoba  was a mosque. Today, it is the cathedral of Cordoba. 
When Spain was under Muslim control, some of the most beautiful buildings were mosques. After 1491, Spain was under Christian control. However, the Christians did not tear down the mosques. They simply put a  crucifix  in them to make them into churches. These mosques influenced the  Renaissance   architecture  (way of building) in Europe.

  References  
 - 
 reflist 2 
 references Category:Mosques  