Cold War

more sources date August 2014 
 File:Europe-blocs-49-89x4.svg thumb|250px|miniatura|right|The political situation in Europe during the Cold War 

The  Cold War  (1947 - 1991) was the  wikt:tense tense   wikt:relationship relationship  between the  United States  (and its  wikt:allies allies ), and the  Soviet Union  (the USSR and its allies) between the end of  World War II  and the demise of the Soviet Union.

  Conflicting countries  
 File:Cold war europe military alliances map en.png thumb|upright|NATO states (blue) and Warsaw pact states (red)|alt=Map of Europe with mostly blue (NATO) areas in west and mostly red (Warsaw Pact) areas in east 
Most of the countries on one side were allied in  NATO  whose most powerful country was the  United States . Most of the countries on the other side were allied in the  Warsaw Pact  whose most powerful country was the  Soviet Union .

The Western-Capitalist group of countries includes Western Europe, the Americas, Turkey, Israel, Japan, South Korea, Thailand, Iran (1945-1979), Pakistan, Malaysia, Philippines, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand.

The Eastern-Socialist group includes Eastern Europe, Soviet Union, Angola, Ethiopia, Cuba (1959-1991), Mongolia, North Korea, China and Vietnam.

  Background   
The start of the Cold War in 1947 was due to a belief that all governments would become either  Communism communist  or  Capitalism capitalist . The Western allies feared that the Soviet Union would use force to expand its influence in Europe,  and was especially concerned that Soviet agents had obtained information on making the  Atom Bomb  after the war.

Both groups of nations had opposed  Nazi Germany .  The  Soviet Union  had initially co-operated with Germany in the division of  Poland  in 1939, but turned against Germany in June 1941.

  After World War II  
 File:Yalta summit 1945 with Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin.jpg thumb|right|The " Allies of World War II Big Three " at the Yalta Conference:  Winston Churchill ,  Franklin D. Roosevelt  and  Joseph Stalin , early 1945 

After WWII, Germany was left in ruins. The victorious Allies that  Occupied territory occupied it  split it into four parts. One part was given to the United Kingdom, one part to France, one part to the United States, and the eastern part was occupied by the USSR.   The city of  Berlin  was partitioned among the four parties even though it was in the part occupied by the USSR.

 File:L_to_R,_British_Prime_Minister_Winston_Churchill,_President_Harry_S._Truman,_and_Soviet_leader_Josef_Stalin_in_the..._-_NARA_-_198958.jpg thumb|right| Winston Churchill ,  Harry S. Truman  and  Joseph Stalin  at the  Potsdam Conference , mid-1945 

The  Federal Republic of Germany  ( Bundesrepublik Deutschland  or BRD) was recognized by the Western allies in June 1949.  From April 1948 to May 1949, the Soviets blockaded West Berlin,  which led to the  Berlin Airlift .    The USSR named their section of Germany the  German Democratic Republic  ( Deutsche Demokratische Republik  or DDR) later in 1949.

The western parts of Berlin were called  West Berlin , inside the DDR. The  Berlin wall  built in 1961 divided the two parts of Berlin and was part of the  iron curtain  that divided Europe.

  The 1950s  
 File:Truman signing National Security Act Amendment of 1949.jpg right|thumb|President Truman signs the National Security Act Amendment of 1949 with guests in the Oval Office 

 Espionage , "spying"  has been around for a very long time, and was very important during the Cold War. After its successful  nuclear espionage  in the  Manhattan Project  the USSR built up its spy organs, especially the  KGB . The  Central Intelligence Agency  led US efforts abroad, while the  FBI  did counterespionage. Catching foreign spies was among KGB functions, as well as fighting domestic  subversion .

In the USSR, the dictator  Joseph Stalin  died and  Nikolai Bulganin  and  Nikita Khrushchev  (1953) took his place.  Khrushchev later took sole control of the USSR.   Khrushchev's Secret Speech  marked a period of  de-Stalinization  and Khrushchev tried to undo many of the things Stalin did (such as the  Gulag  prison camps and cult of personality).

In the United States, there was a ""Red Scare", and when the USSR detonated its own atom bomb, there was a great deal of political  fallout .  Noted persons in many fields who had been Communist sympathizers in the past lost their positions.  Many actors were 'blacklisted' and were not hired to act in movies, ruining their careers. Senator  Joseph McCarthy  accused some important Americans of being communists, including some high government officials.

 File:Mao, Bulganin, Stalin, Ulbricht Tsedenbal.jpeg thumb|right|Mao Zedong and Joseph Stalin in Moscow, December 1949 

 File:IncheonLandingMcArthur.jpg thumb|right|General  Douglas MacArthur , UN Command CiC (seated), observes the naval shelling of  Incheon  from the  USS Mount McKinley (AGC-7) USS  Mt. McKinley , September 15, 1950 

The 1950s were the beginning of the  space race  between the  United States  and  USSR . It began with the USSR putting the  Sputnik  satellite into orbit around  the Earth , making the Soviet Union the first country in space. The United States responded by starting  NASA , and soon sent up its own satellites. The Soviet Union also sent the first man ( Yuri Gagarin ) into Earth orbit, claiming that this proved communism was the better ideology.

In the 1950s, the United States (under president  Dwight Eisenhower ) created a policy called "New Look," cutting defense spending and increasing the number of nuclear weapons as a deterrent in order to prevent the Soviet Union from attacking the USA.  The USSR also increased their nuclear force, resulting in   mutual assured destruction .

In the  Suez Canal Suez  Crisis of 1956, the Cold War alliances were broken for the first time with the Soviet Union and United States favouring one side, and Britain and France the other. Later that year, the Western allies did not interfere when Soviet troops suppressed an anti-communist revolution in  Hungary .

United States Vice-President  Richard Nixon  engaged in several talks with Nikita Khrushchev during the  1950s . One of these was the 1959 " Kitchen Debate " in a model kitchen in  Moscow . These debates highlighted the political and economic differences between the USA and the USSR. The following year, the United States  Lockheed U-2 U-2 spy plane  crashed in the  Soviet Union . Tensions between the two countries increased.

  Cuban Missile Crisis (1962)  
 main article Cuban Missile Crisis 
 File:M-26-7.svg thumb|right|Flag of the  26th of July Movement 
 File:Leonid Brezhnev and Richard Nixon talks in 1973.png right|thumb| Leonid Brezhnev  and  Richard Nixon  during Brezhnev's June 1973 visit to Washington; this was a high-water mark in detente between the United States and the Soviet Union 

After the United States tried to invade  Cuba  and failed ( Bay of Pigs ), the Soviet Union attempted to supply Cuba with  nuclear missiles . These missiles in Cuba would have allowed the Soviet Union to effectively target almost the entire United States. In response the United States sent a large number of ships to blockade Cuba thus preventing the Soviet Union from delivering these weapons. The United States and Soviet Union came to agreement that the Soviet Union would no longer give nuclear weapons to Cuba as long as the United States does not invade Cuba again. This was the highest period of tension during the Cold War and it was the closest the world came to a nuclear war, with possible global conflict to follow.

  Detente (1962-1981)  
After the agreement that ended the Cuban Missile Crisis, relations between the two sides eased. Several treaties, designed to reduce the number of nuclear weapons, were signed. During this period, the United States began building a good relationship with China, a previous ally of  Russia.

  The end of the Cold War (1981-1991)  
 File:ReaganBerlinWall.jpg thumb|right|Reagan speaks at the  Berlin Wall 's  Brandenburg Gate , encouraging  Mikhail Gorbachev Gorbachev  to " tear down this wall " 

The policy of detente ended in 1981, when the U.S. president  Ronald Reagan  ordered a massive military build-up to challenge the Soviet Union's influence around the world. The United States began to support anti-communists all over the world with money and weapons. The idea was to help them overthrow their communist governments.

The Soviet Union had a slow economy during this decade because military spending was at an all-time high. They tried to keep up with the United States in military spending, but could not. In the  Soviet war in Afghanistan  starting in 1979, the Soviet Union had a difficult time fighting resistance groups, some of them armed and trained by the United States. The Soviet Union's failed invasion of  Afghanistan  is often compared to the United States' failure during the Vietnam War.
 File:Reagan and Gorbachev signing.jpg thumb|left|Mikhail Gorbachev and Ronald Reagan sign the  Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty INF Treaty  at the White House, 1987 

In the late 1980s the new Soviet President  Mikhail Gorbachev  made an effort to make an ally of the United States to fix world problems caused by the war, with the ultimate aim of eliminating  nuclear weapon s completely. However, this did not take place because the President of the United States,  Ronald Reagan , insisted on having a nuclear missile defense system. The people of the Soviet Union were divided on their feelings about this. Some wanted President Gorbachev to fight harder to eliminate nuclear weapons, while others did not want him to be talking to the United States at all. These mixed feelings created an atmosphere of political in-fighting, and the people were no longer united behind one goal. Because of this, leaders of the Soviet Union started to fight against each other, the Communist Party began to crumble and the Soviet Union collapsed.

After the fall of the  Berlin Wall  in 1989 and without Communist rule holding together the countries that comprised the Soviet Union, the USSR broke into smaller countries, like  Russia ,  Ukraine ,  Lithuania  and  Georgia (country) Georgia . The nations of  Eastern Europe  returned to capitalism, and the period of the Cold War was over. The Soviet Union ended in December 1991. ref http://www.coldwar.org/articles/90s/fall_of_the_soviet_union.asp ref 

Not all historians agree on when the Cold War ended. Some think it ended when the Berlin Wall fell. Others think it ended when the Soviet Union collapsed  in 1991. ref http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/cold_war.htm ref 

  References  
 reflist 

  Other websites  
 Commons category 
   http://en.citizendium.org/wiki/Cold_War Cold War  -Citizendium

 Cold War figures 
 Joseph Stalin 

 Category:Cold War