Trademark

A  trademark  (or  trade mark ) is a way for a business to help people to identify the  product (consumer goods) products  that the business makes from products made by another business. A trademark can be a  name , word,  phrase ,  symbol ,  logo ,  design , or  picture . It can only be used on things made by the business that owns the trademark. 

For example,  Coca-Cola  and Coke are trademark names for a certain drink made by the Coca-Cola Company. No other business can use these names or any names similar to them. Other businesses can make a drink that is similar, like  cola colas  soft drinks, but they have to use a different name for their drink, such as  Pepsi .

Another example is the  Nike, Inc. Nike  company which makes sporting goods like  shoes  and  clothes . The "swoosh" symbol used on their products is a trademark.

Famous trademarks like Coca-Cola and Nike are used for  brand ing whole families of products.

 Trademark and law 
 Getting a trademark 
Trademarks are protected by  law . In some countries, a person or company can get a trademark simply by using the name, word, phrase, symbol, logo, design, or picture on its products.

Trademarks can also be registered. In that case, the business tells the  government  of its  country  that it wants to use a certain name, word, phrase, symbol, logo, design or picture as a trademark for the products it sells. If no other person or business is using the trademark to sell those products, then the government will list that trademark. Once it is listed, no one else can use that trademark for those products. This is called " :wikt:register register ing" the trademark.

 Using another person's trademark 
If someone uses the trademark in a wrong way, the trademark owner can  Lawsuit sue  the other person. If a  court  decides that the other person was not allowed to use the trademark, they might have to pay a  fine  to the trademark owner. 

If another person wants to use a trademark that they do not own, they can ask the trademark owner for  permission .  The trademark owner can grant the other person a  license .  The other person usually must pay some  money  to the trademark owner for the license.  This can be in the form of a  percentage  of the cost of the product that the other person sells called a royalty. For example, a person might pay Nike ten percent (10%) of the cost of each pair of  shoe s it sells for the right to include the Swoosh.

 Marking products with trademarks 
When people write a word that is a trademark or show a picture or symbol that is a trademark, they should say that it is a trademark. If a trademark is not registered, they can write the word "Trademark", use the  abbreviation  "TM", or use the symbol  (tm)  on their products. 

If a trademark is registered, they can use the letter R in a circle symbol: "(r)". People can also say it is a "registered trademark" or use the abbreviation "Reg."

 Service marks 
Trademarks are used for products.  Businesses that do things for people instead of making things are called  service (economics) service  providers. They can get a  service mark  instead of a trademark. When people write or show a service mark, they can use the service mark symbol: "(sm)".

 Laws by country 
In the United States, the governing law for trademarks is the  Lanham Act , in Germany the  Markengesetz .

 Category:Symbols 
 Category:Intellectual property law 
 Category:Business