Religion

Religion 
A  religion  is a set of  belief s that is held by a group of people. There are many different religions, each with a different set of beliefs. The beliefs are about the world and the people in it, about how they came into being, and what their purpose is. These beliefs are often linked to  supernatural  beings such as  God , a number of  Deity gods  or  spirit s. They may also be linked to an idea such as a path that the spirit of each person should take towards goodness, truth and duty. This is called  spirituality . Each religion has different ideas about these things. Each religion also has a " moral  code" which is a set of beliefs about how humans should act. Each religion usually has their own type of "devotions" when people worship or pray. They often have  ritual s (special things that are always done in the same way) for certain times of the year or certain times of a person's life. ref http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/religion Reference Dictionary- Religion ref  Other words that are used for religion are "faith" and "belief system". ref The words "belief system" may not necessarily refer to a religion, though a religion may be referred to as "belief system." ref  Altogether, followers of religion can be known as  religionists . Some people follow more than one religion at a time.

The largest religions are  Christianity ,  Islam ,  Hinduism ,  Buddhism ,  Taoism ,  Sikhism  and  Judaism . There are many  List of religions other religions . ref cite web url http://www.adherents.com/Religions_By_Adherents.html title Major Religions by adherents ref  People who do not believe in any gods are called  atheism atheists . People who say that they are not sure whether they believe or not are called  agnosticism agnostics . ref cite web url http://www.adherents.com/Religions_By_Adherents.html#Nonreligious title Secular, Nonreligious, Agnostic, Atheist ref ref name AtheismAgnosticismSEP cite web url http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/atheism-agnosticism/ title Atheism and Agnosticism publisher Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ref 

  Religious beliefs  
  God  
 File:Brahma Musee Guimet 25971.jpg thumb|upright|A statue of the Hindu deity  Brahma . 

In many religions, one of the main beliefs is that there is a "deity" (or  Deity god ) who is a great  Creation myth creator  spirit. In many religions, there is just  Monotheism one deity  that the people believe in. In other religions, there are  Polytheism many deities  who each have different roles in the  universe . In many religions, there are other types of spirits. These may include  angel s,  devil s and other such things which can be both good and bad.

Giving honour to God, the gods or the spirits is an important part of most religions. While this may often be done privately, it is also often done with gatherings of people and  ritual s. These rituals are often based on old  tradition s, and may have been done in almost the same way for hundreds, or even thousands of years.

 File:Mother Teresa.jpg thumb|left|upright|Mother Teresa of Calcutta was known for her Christian kindness. 

  Human spirit  
Another main belief is that humans have a "soul" or spirit which lives on after their body has died. The person's spirit is on a journey through life that continues after death. Most religions believe that what a person does during their lifetime will affect what happens to their spirit in the  afterlife . Many religions teach that a good person's spirit can reach a special place of peace and happiness such as  Heaven  or  Nirvana , and that a bad person's spirit can travel to a place of pain and suffering such as  Hell . Still other religions believe in  reincarnation  - that instead of going either to Heaven or Hell, spirits of the dead return to earth in a new body.

  Morality  
"Morals" are the way a human behaves to other humans. Most religions make rules about human morals. The rules of how people should act to each other are different in different religions.

For some religions, following a "path" of goodness, truth and duty is very important. This is called  Tao  in China. In the teachings of  Judaism , people were told to "love your neighbour as yourself". In the teachings of  Jesus , people were told to think of every single person as their "neighbour" and treat them with love.

Not every religion teaches people to be kind to all other people. In many religions, it has been common for people to believe that they have to act kindly only to some people and not to others. In some religions, people believed that they could please a god by killing or  human sacrifice sacrificing  another person.

  Traditions  
 File:Shane Claiborne OCP.jpg thumb|The man on the left is teaching others about his religion 
  Teaching  
A religion is passed on from one person to another through teachings and stories (which are often called "myths") which may be written down like the  Bible , or  Oral tradition told from memory  like the  Dreaming (spirituality) Dreamtime  stories of  Indigenous Australians Australian Aboriginal  people. In many religions, there are people who take the role of "priest" and spend their lives teaching others about the religion. There are also people who take the role of "pastor" and spend their life caring for other people. A person may be both a priest and a pastor. They are called by different names in different religions.

  Symbols  
 Symbol s are used to remind people of their religious beliefs. They are also used or worn as a sign to other people that the person belongs to a particular religion. A symbol might be something that is drawn or written, it might be a piece of clothing or jewellery, it might be a sign that a person makes with their body, or it might be a building or monument or artwork. Picture symbols for different religions are shown in the box in the introduction to this article.

  Witness and conversion  
In many religions, it is thought important that people should show other people that they are following a particular religion. This might be done in a general way by wearing a symbol or a type of clothing. Many people believe that it is important to tell other people about their religion, so that they can believe as well. This is called "witnessing". 
 File:Sikhs on the move!.jpg thumb|left|These Sikhs in Canada wear a head-dress of turban or head scarf as a symbol and witness to their religion. 
There are many ways to witness. A young person might simply say to their friends "I do not use drugs or get drunk because of my religion". This is a witness. A person may tell their classmates, workmates and friends about their beliefs. A person might go to other people's houses and talk about their beliefs, or invite the people to join in the rituals of the religion, such as going to church or to a religious festival. A person might have printed material such as books or leaflets that they give to other people to read. A person might travel to a different country to teach, to work in a health service or to help people in some other way. (People who do this are called "missionaries".) These are different ways that people witness to their religion.

When a person hears a witness and decides that they will join the religion, this is called a "conversion". Usually a person decides to join a religion because they like what they have read or been told, and they believe that they are hearing the truth. They join the religion because they choose. However, throughout history there have been many times when people have been forced to join a religion by violence and threats. This is still happening today.

In most countries of the world, people are free to belong to whatever religion they choose. This is generally thought of as a basic  Human rights human right . However, there are parts of the world where it is illegal (against the law) to witness to any religion except the one accepted by the government of the country. People who belong to other religions may be threatened, put in jail or murdered.

 File:Muslim man at prayer.jpg thumb|upright|A Muslim man at prayer. Prayer is an important ritual for many religious people. 

  Ritual  
 Ritual s are an important part of the tradition of many religions. In many religions, it is the tradition for people to meet for a celebration on one day in every week. There are also major celebrations that may be held only at certain times of the year, for example, on the birthday of a person who is honoured in that religion. Some religions have celebrations for different seasons of the year, or when the sun or moon is in a certain part of the sky.

In nearly every religion, the important stages of a person's life have a religious celebration. Birth, naming, reaching an age to think for oneself, reaching adulthood, marriage, childbirth, sickness and death are all celebrated by some religions. Having a celebration or special traditions when a person dies is very common.

It is the traditions that are about death that give the earliest evidence of religious beliefs. Scientists have discovered that 120,000 years ago,  Neanderthal  people started burying their dead. Early  Homo sapiens  put tools and other things into graves with the bodies, as if they could use them in the afterlife. From 40,000 years ago, many of the objects in graves are small artworks. Scientists believe that these objects were put there for religious reasons.

 File:Dalai Lama and Bishop Tutu. Carey Linde.jpg thumb|left|Leaders in two religious institutions, the Dalai Lama (Buddhist) and Archbishop Desmond Tutu ( Anglican Church Anglican ) 

  Groups and institutions  
An  institution  is one name for an organization. Many religions have organizations that manage the way that people who follow the religion are to act. The organization might  employment employ  religious leaders,  education educate  people into the ideas of the religion, manage money, own buildings and make rules. Many religions have sub-groups which are called  denomination s. In Islam, for example, there is  Ahmadiyya ,  Sunnism ,  Shi'ism  and  Sufism .

  Buildings  
 File:Psalms WesternWall.jpg thumb|A Jewish man reads the Psalms of David at the Western Wall,  Jerusalem 

Most religions have special buildings where people meet. They are often called  temple s. In  Judaism , they are called  synagogue s. In  Christianity , they are called  church es. In  Islam , they are called  mosque s. In  Buddhism  there are  pagoda s, temples and monasteries. People often try to make their religious building as beautiful as possible. Some religious buildings are great works of  architecture .

  Art and music  
People often make artworks that are about their religion, or that are used in religious celebration, or are put in a religious building. Religious art comes in all shapes and sizes, from tiny pieces of jewellery to huge statues and paintings. Artworks often give important clues to  historian s about different ancient religions that are not well understood.

Music is often important in religious celebrations. Singing, chanting and playing musical instruments are often part of regular religious gatherings of people. Special music is often used on special occasions. Many famous composers have written religious music. The words of songs that are 3,000 years old are used every day in Christian churches and Jewish synagogues.

  Related pages  
   List of religions 
   Religious denomination 

  References  
 reflist 2 

 Further reading 
 commonscat Religion 
  Chopra, R.M., "A Study of Religions", 2015, Anuradha Prakashan, New Delhi, ISBN 978-93-82339-94-6

  Other websites  
   http://www.religionfacts.com/ Religion Facts 
   http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/ Religion  on the  BBC  website

 religionfooter 

 Category:Religion   
 Category:Religions   
 Category:Basic English 850 words