Earth science

Image:Volcano q.jpg thumb|250px|A  volcano  eruption is the release of stored energy from below the surface of Earth. The heat comes mostly from  radioactive decay , and  convection , in the Earth's  Planetary core core  and  Mantle (geology) mantle . ref Encyclopedia of Volcanoes . Academic Press, London, 2000. ref 
 Earth science  is an all-embracing term for the  science s related to the planet  Earth (planet) Earth . ref http://wordnet.princeton.edu/perl/webwn?s=earth%20science Wordnet Search: Earth science ref  Earth science may also be called  geoscience . 

It is a broader term than  geology  because it includes aspects of  planetary science , which is part of  astronomy . The Earth sciences include the study of the  atmosphere ,  ocean s and  biosphere , as well as the solid earth. Typically Earth scientists will use tools from  physics ,  chemistry ,  biology ,  chronology  and  mathematics  to understand the Earth, and how it evolved to its current state.

If there is one fact which underlies all Earth science it is this: the Earth is an ancient  planet  which has been changing the whole time since its  Age of the Earth formation . The extent of the changes is much greater than people used to think. ref Van Andel, Tjeerd 1994.  New views on an old planet: a history of global change . 2nd ed, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK. ref 

 Fields of study 
 File:Ordovicium-Silurian.jpg thumb|250px|The  Ordovician - Silurian  boundary, an example of  Ocean marine  transgression as exposed on the Southern tip of the Hovedoya island,  Norway . Due to the folding of the  Caledonian  mountain range, the layers have been inverted, leaving Ordovician granular  limestone  on top of the later Silurian brownish  mudstone . 
The following disciplines are generally recognised as being within the geosciences:
   Geology  describes the  Rock (geology) rocky  parts of the Earth's  Crust (geology) crust  (or  lithosphere ) and its historic development. Major subdisciplines are  mineralogy  and  petrology ,  geochemistry ,  geomorphology ,  paleontology ,  stratigraphy ,  structural geology , engineering  geology  and  sedimentology . ref Adams, Simon & Lambert, David 2006.  Earth Science: an illustrated guide to science . New York NY 10001: Chelsea House. ISBN 0-8160-6164-5. ref <ref
name="smith 5">Smith, Gary A. & Pun, Aurora 2006. How does the Earth work?. Pearson Prentice Hall, NJ. ISBN 0-13-034129-0.</ref>
   Geophysics  and  Geodesy  investigate the shape of the Earth, its reaction to forces and its  magnetic field magnetic  and  gravity  fields. Geophysicists explore the  Planetary core Earth's core  and  Earth's mantle mantle  as well as the  Plate tectonics tectonic  and  Seismology seismic  activity of the lithosphere. ref name smith 5 ref http://wordnet.princeton.edu/perl/webwn?s=geodesy Wordnet Search: Geodesy ref ref http://www.oceanservice.noaa.gov/education/kits/geodesy/welcome.html NOAA National Ocean Service Education: Geodesy ref 
   Soil science  covers the outermost layer of the Earth's crust that is subject to soil formation processes (or  pedosphere ). ref http://soil.gsfc.nasa.gov/ped/pedosph.htm Elissa Levine, 2001, The Pedosphere As A Hub ref ref http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~doetqp-p/courses/env320/lec1/Lec1.html Duane Gardiner, Lecture: Why study soils? excerpted from Miller R.W. & D.T. Gardiner, 1998.  Soils in our environment , 8th Edition ref 
   Oceanography  and  hydrology  (includes  limnology ) describe the marine and freshwater domains of the  water y parts of the Earth (or  hydrosphere ). Includes  Marine biology .
   Glaciology  covers the  ice icy  parts of the Earth (or  cryosphere ).
  Atmospheric sciences cover the  gas eous parts of the Earth (or  atmosphere ) between the surface and the  exosphere  (about 1000 km). Major subdisciplines are  meteorology ,  climatology , atmospheric  chemistry  and  physics .
  Closely related to the earth sciences are  physical geography  and  biology .

  List of Earth science topics  
  Atmosphere  

   Atmospheric chemistry 
   Climatology 
   Meteorology 
   Paleoclimatology 

  Biosphere  
   Biogeography 
   Paleontology 
   Micropaleontology 

  Hydrosphere  
   Hydrology 
   Limnology 
   Hydrogeology 
   Oceanography 
   Marine biology 
   Paleoceanography 
   Physical oceanography 

  Lithosphere or geosphere  
   Geology 
   Environmental geology 
   Historical geology 
   Planetary geology 
   Sedimentology 
   Stratigraphy 
   Structural geology 
   Geography 
   Physical geography 
   Geochemistry 
   Geomorphology 
   Geophysics 
   Geodynamics  (see also  Tectonics )
   Geomagnetic s
   Seismology 
   Glaciology 
   Mineralogy 
   Crystallography 
   Petrology 
   Volcanology 

  Pedosphere  
   Soil science 

  Systems  
   Environmental science 
   Geography 
   Gaia hypothesis 

  Others  
   Cartography 
   Geostatistics 
   Geodesy 

  References  
 Reflist 

 commonscat Earth sciences 

 Category:Earth sciences  