Catharism

complex date March 2012 nosources date October 2012 
 File:Cathars expelled.JPG thumb|right|The cathars are expelled from  Carcassonne , in the year 1209 
 File:Chateau de Peyrepertuse - Enceinte basse et eperon (est).jpg thumb|right|The lower, older part of Castle  Peyrepertuse . This castle was one of the last Cathar strongholds to fall 

The  Cathar   wikt:faith faith  was a version of  Christianity . They were usually considered  Gnosticism Gnostics . The word 'Cathar' comes the Greek word  katharos  meaning 'unpolluted' (from Tobias Churton,  The Gnostics ) or  "the pure ones".

  Principles  
The Cathars believed that the world had been made by a bad god.  They believed that this bad god had taken them from the good god and put them in the world, but inside their bodies there was a spirit, and that spirit needed to return to the good god.  They were famous for a belief in a form of  reincarnation  and believed that when someone died the bad god would put that person's spirit in a new body. They believed this cycle of coming back to life could be escaped by a ritual cleansing.  They were opposed to the doctrine of  sin .  

 Women  were prominent in the faith.  They were  pacifist s.  They didn't eat anything that was made from other animals, including meat and  milk cows milk . The only  wikt:exception exception  to this was  fish . Fish was OK to eat because they believed fishes were not alive but just things that were sometimes produced from dirt and water.

They preached tolerance of other faiths.  They rejected the usual Christian rules of  marriage  and only believed in the New Testament.  An earlier 10th century Bulgarian heresy,  Bogomilism  and also  Manichaeism  started some of these trends.  

  Language  
They used a bible in the language people spoke. Many other Christians used a Bible in  Latin language Latin . Latin was spoken only by the  priest s.

  Problems  
In 1145, open challenge to Catholic dominance began.  In about 1165, the first Cathars said that the Church was "full of ravening (starving) wolves and hypocrites" and "worshipping the wrong God", right in front of the most powerful Catholics. In 1166, the  Council of Oxford  in  England  wiped out the English Cathars.  It was also suppressed in Northern France.  In 1167, Cathar  bishop s met to discuss organizing a counter Church - in the South of France, the Languedoc nobles protected it, and many noble women became "Perfects".  Parish clergy had low  morale , or confidence.

  Reactions  
The  Catholic Church  was against Catharism, seeing it as a heresy.

In the South of France there was tremendous  religious fervor , and an  economy  that was starting to grow, and a social class of   merchant s and   peasant s was starting to grow.  Peasants owned their own  land .  Meanwhile, in other parts of  Europe , peasants were forced to give up their land to  noble s and become  serf s or  slave s - the system of  feudalism .  There was a strong central  absolute monarchy  that did not exist in the South of France.  The  burgher s and  banker s had more power in this looser system.   R. I. Moore  is a historian who believes that it was desire to crush this system and take over the land that drove the attack.

However, there was real cultural and religious difference to cause problems:   Troubador s, who combined some of the traditions of the  Bard s of the  Celt s, and  Jew s, were both part of the multicultural society in the South of  France .  Their influences were not appreciated by local or Roman Church figures.  The 12th century Roman Catholic  Monk s were founding their  monastery monasteries  outside the towns, drawing the best people there.

  Results  
The Cathars thus had little competition.  The Cathar "Perfects", the so-called Good Men or Good Women, lived restrained lives and spread their faith in towns - where the Catholics in general did not have their best agents.  Also, Cathars preached that only these Good leaders had to follow the regimens their whole lives - lay people could repent only on their deathbeds.  Many 20th century  Christian sect s have similar beliefs.

  The Albigensian Crusade  
  Methods  
The Pope ordered a crusade against the Cathars in southern France.  He said any crusader who answered the call would be given the same rewards as a crusader who went to the Holy Land.  This was an  absolution  of all sin.

In the  Launguedoc , on the 22nd of July 1209, a force of about 30,000  Crusader s arrived at the walls of Beziers bearing the cross pattee to mislead and create ease among the Cathars, thinking they were friend, not foe, and  demanded that about 200 Cathars be surrendered.  The people of the town who were mostly Catholic, said that rather than turn over their friends and family, "we would rather be  flaying flayed alive ."  

A mistake by the defenders of  Beziers  let thousands of attackers in. Arnauld Amaury made the famous quote "Kill them all, god knows his own"  on being asked how to tell who were Cathars during the assault. Everyone in the town was killed, some while taking refuge in the church.  It is guessed that 20,000 were killed, many of whom were Catholics and not Cathars at all.  The crusade became known as the  Albigensian crusade  after the town of  Albi .  It was to wipe out the Cathars almost entirely over forty or so years.  The Crusaders wanted to go home, but were ordered by the Pope to continue until the whole South of France was controlled and all Cathars were dead. In 1210, they attacked the fortress at  Minerv  and built "the first great bonfire of heretics" - beginning the practice of  Pyre burning at the stake  that would continue in the  Inquisition  of the  Counter-Reformation . It is interesting to note that at the siege of Montsegur when the fires were lit the Cathars ran down the hill and threw themselves on, as their beliefs were very strong.

 Result 
Catharism disappeared from the northern Italian cities after the 1260s, pressured by the Inquisition. The last known Cathar perfectus in the Languedoc,  Guillaume Belibaste , was killed in 1321.

  Other websites  
   http://dannyreviews.com/h/Cathars.html 
   http://gnosistraditions.faithweb.com/mont.html 
   http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/gui-cathars.html 
   http://philtar.ucsm.ac.uk/encyclopedia/  christ/west/cathar.html
   http://pages.britishlibrary.net/forrester-roberts/  cathars.html
   http://www.rennes-le-chateau.co.uk/html/cathars.htm 
   http://cathars.philosophi.org Cathar Center in Barcelona: Books, spirituality, exhibition 

 ChristianBeliefs 

 Category:Gnosticism