Human body

The  human body  is the  body  of a  person . It is the physical structure of a person. 

The body is a thing that can be hurt or killed. Its functions are stopped by  death .

  Study of the human body  
 File:Anterior view of human female and male, with labels.jpg thumb|right|The bodies of two humans of the opposite  sex . 
Some people  Research study  the human body. They look at where it is different from or the same as other  animal s' bodies. These animals can be alive today. Or they can be  extinct  animals like other  hominid s. (Hominids are  primate s that are close to humans.  Neanderthal s and  Homo erectus  were hominids.) Some people study how the human body works and lives in its  environment . Some people study what people think about their body. Artists study how to draw or paint the human body.

  Fields of study  
Many different fields of study look at the human:
   Biology  is a field of  science . It studies living things. It looks at how the human body works. It studies how the human body came from  evolution . It studies how  genetics  makes the human body.
   Anatomy  studies the parts of the body and how they work together.
   Ecology  studies the environment including how humans affect it.
   Anthropology  is a field of science. It compares humans to other  hominid s. It also studies all other hominid bodies. They look at how  human s and  chimpanzee s are the same or different.
   Psychology  is a field of  medicine . It looks at how people think and feel. The  brain  is part of the body. How we think and feel comes from the brain. So psychologists study the body. They study how the brain lets us be who we are.
   Religion  also talks about the body. Some religions see the body as where the  soul  lives. Some see the body as like a  church . This is because a church is where people  worship   God . These people think God should be worshiped inside people. Some religions think the body is made from  chakras  that connect us to the  universe .
   Medicine  sees the body like a  machine .  Medical doctor Doctors  want to fix problems with the body. They study how to fix the problems, called  disease s.

  The human body and other animals  
Scientists think that the human body is very much like other animals. They see that some human  behaviors  are like animal behaviors. (Behaviors are the way an  organism  acts.) They know that 98% of the  DNA  in humans is the same as other  primate s.

  DNA sequence differences between humans and chimpanzees  
The animal that is alive now that is closest to humans is the  chimpanzee .  98.4%  of the DNA is the same between humans and chimpanzees. However, this applies only to single nucleotide  polymorphism s, that is, changes in  single  base pairs only. The full picture is rather different.

The draft sequence of the  common chimpanzee   genome  was published in 2005. It showed that the regions which are similar enough to be aligned with one another account for 2400 million of the human genome's 3164.7 million bases, ref name Consortium cite journal   author   The Chimpanzee Sequencing and Analysis Consortium   year   2005   title   Initial sequence of the chimpanzee genome and comparison with the human genome   journal   Nature   volume   437   issue   1 September 2005   pages   69-87   doi   10.1038/nature04072   pmid   16136131 bibcode   2005Natur.437...69.  ref  that is,  75.8% of the genome . 

This 75.8% of the human genome is 1.23% different from the chimpanzee genome in single-nucleotide polymorphisms ref name Consortium  (SNPs - changes of single DNA "letters" in the genome). Another type of difference, called 'indels' (insertions/deletions) account for another ~3% difference between the alignable sequences. ref name Consortium  In addition, variation in copy number of large segments (> 20 kb) of similar DNA sequence provides a further 2.7% difference between the two species. ref name Cheng cite journal   author   Cheng Z.  et al.    year   2005   title   A genome-wide comparison of recent chimpanzee and human segmental duplications   journal   Nature   volume   437   issue   1 September 2005   pages   88-93   doi   10.1038/nature04000   pmid   16136132   bibcode 2005Natur.437...88C ref  Hence the total similarity of the genomes could be as low as about 70%.

  References  
 Reflist 

 Category:Anatomy