Comet

otheruses the objects in  outer space space store Comet (shop) 
 File:CometDiagram.png thumb|205px|Diagram of a comet's  orbit 
A  comet  is a  sphere ball  of mostly  ice  that moves around in  outer space . Comets are often described as "dirty snowballs".  They are very different from  asteroid s.  The  orbital inclination s of comets are usually high and not near the  ecliptic  where most  solar system  objects are found. Most of them are long-period comets and come from the  Kuiper belt . That is very far away from the Sun, but some of them also come near enough to Earth for us to see at  wikt:night night .  

They have long "tails", because the Sun  melt s the ice. A comet's tail does not trail behind it, but points directly away from the Sun, because it is blown by the  solar wind .
The hard centre of the comet is the  comet nucleus nucleus . It is one of the blackest things in the solar system. When  light  shone on the nucleus of  Halley's Comet , the comet reflected only 4% of the light back to us.

 Periodic comets Periodic  comets  visit again and again.  Non-periodic  or  single-apparition  comets visit only once.

Comets sometimes break up, as  Comet Biela  did in the 19th century.   Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9  broke up, and the pieces hit  Jupiter (planet) Jupiter  in  1994 . Some comets orbit (go around) together in groups.  Astronomer s think these comets are broken pieces that used to be one object.

  Famous comets  
 main list of comets 
 Halley's Comet 
 Hale-Bopp 
 Shoemaker-Levy 9 
 Ikeya seki 

  History of comets  
In old times, people used to be scared of comets. They did not know what they were, or where they came from. Some thought that they were fireballs sent from demons or gods to destroy the earth. They said that each time a comet appeared, it would bring bad luck with it. Whenever a comet appeared, a king would die. For example, the  Bayeux Tapestry  shows the return of  Halley's Comet  and the death of a king. Comets were also known to end wars and thought to bring famine.  During the  Renaissance ,  astronomer s started to look at comets with less superstition and to base their  science  on observations.  Tycho Brahe  reasoned that comets did not come from the earth, and his calculations showed that comets must be six times farther than the earth is from the moon.

 Edmond Halley  reasoned that some comets are periodic, that is, they appear again after a certain number of years, and again and again. This led to the first prediction of a comet's return,  Halley's Comet , named after him.

 Isaac Newton  also studied comets. He realised that comets make U-turns around the sun. He asked his friend Edmond Halley to publish this in his book  Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica . Before Newton said this, people believed that comets go in to the sun, then another comes out from behind the sun. 

In later years some astronomers thought comets were spit out by planets, especially  Jupiter .

All this new information and research gave people confidence, but some still thought that comets were messengers from the gods. One 18th century vision said that comets were the places that  hell  was, where souls would ride, being burned up by the heat of the sun and frozen by the cold of space.

In modern times  space probe s have visited comets to learn more about them.

 Related pages 
 List of comets 

  Other websites  
 http://stevechallis.net/Comets.php Are Comets Made of Antimatter? 

 Solar System 

 Category:Comets  