Execution


 Execution  is where  state  authorities  kill  someone for having committed an extremely serious  crime , usually  treason  or especially terrible  murder s. In most  country countries  where the  death penalty  is still provided for by  law , using it is an option available to the sentencing  judge : even if the jury or judicial panel recommends the death penalty, the presiding judge still has the option to lock the convicted person in a  prison  for the rest of their life.


 Beheading 
 Image:DelarocheLadyJaneGrey.jpg thumb| Lady Jane Grey , a probably innocent Queen of England is beheaded. 
Beheading means cutting the convict's head off. It is one of the oldest execution methods and already mentioned in the  Bible . Beheading used to be the standard method of execution in Scandinavia and Germany. Commoners were usually beheaded with an  axe  and noblemen with a  sword . A special device, like  guillotine , can also be used, as in France.  Nazi Germany  used guillotine to execute criminal convicts, such as murderers.

Centuries ago many countries used beheading as an execution for important people, including England. In England, many noblemen and even some kings and queens have been beheaded. There, the prisoner would be led up the scaffold and usually say a speech. Then, he/she would be blindfolded and put his/her neck onto a block. Then, the executioner would lift up his axe and swing it down onto the victim's neck. If the executioner was skilled and the axe was sharp, then the axe would usually cut through the bone and organs of the victim in one stroke. But if the executioner was inexperienced, then it may take many strokes before the head would be cut off.

 Other ways of execution 
 File:Edouard Manet 022.jpg thumb| The Execution of Emperor Maximilan of Mexico  is a painting by  Edouard Manet . It shows a firing squad. 
Many countries do not allow executions as punishment any more, because it is too violent.  However, many states of the  United States  and some other foreign countries allow it.  Even in the United States, less violent ways of execution have had to be used.  Here are some other ways of execution other than hanging

 Lethal injection :  Killing a person by placing several poisons in their blood.  This is used as the choice of execution in most U.S. states that allow executions.
 Gas chamber : A person is placed in area where the air is filled with bad gases until he cannot breathe and dies.  This was used as an execution method in some U.S. states, and by the Nazis during the Holocaust.
 Electrocution : Killing a person by placing them in an  electric chair  and giving them a very high electric shock.
 Firing Squad :  Several people shoot and kill a person.  This execution was used in the state of  Utah  until recently, and was also often used in the United States  Army . This method has been popular amongst the armies around the world, since guns and bullets are readily available. Firing squad was the lawful means of execution in  Finland  until 1944, when death penalty was abolished (stopped by the law). In most cases, not all the people firing have real bullets. After the execution, it is not possible to determine which of the people firing killed the person just executed.

  Old-fashioned methods  
 Garrote Garroting , a method of strangulation used in  Spain  for hundreds of years.
 Crushing , also called  pressing : used in the  common law  legal systems. A  defendant  who refused to plead ("stood mute") would be subjected to having heavier and heavier  stone s placed upon his or her  chest  until a plea was entered or the person  Suffocation suffocated .
 Hanging : Using a rope to either break the convict's neck or to choke (strangulate) him.  Widely used around the world until the 20th century. Still today in use in some countries, such as  Iraq ,  Singapore  and  Japan .
 Drawing and Quartering :  A very violent form of execution common in Medieval and Renaissance Europe. It involved taking a person's organs out while he was still alive, then tying him to four horses going in different directions until his body is torn apart.  A similar thing is "breaking on the wheel", when a wheel rather than horses is used to tear a person's body apart
 Cruxifixion : This method means literally nailing the convict on a  cross . It is considered as the most painful and nasty method of all. It was used by the  Ancient Rome Romans  to punish traitors, rebels and runaway slaves. Death by this method may take days. The convict dies from blood loss, slow choking, loss of water and fever caused by muscle cramps. Besides the Roman and Persian Empires, this method was also used in feudal Japan.

 Category:Crime 
 Category:Capital punishment