Ion

For the television network Ion Television 
An  ion  is an  electric charge electrically charged   atom  or group of atoms. ref name fund cite book title Fundamentals of Chemistry: A Modern Introduction publisher Academic Press date 1966 first1 Frank last1 Brescia first2 John last2 Arents first3 Herbert last3 Meislich first4 Amos last4 Turk edition First page 5 ref 
It is a part of an  atom , or part of a group of atoms ( molecule ). It is " electric charge charge d" so it will move near electricity. This is because atoms are made of three smaller parts:  neutron s (with no charge), and equal numbers of (2) charged  proton s and (3) oppositely-charged  electron s. An ion has unequal numbers of protons and electrons. Making an ion from an atom or molecule is called  ionization .

The charge on a proton is measured as +1 (positively charged). The charge on an electron is measured as -1 (negatively charged). An atom that is ionized makes two ions, one positive, and one negatively charged. For example, a neutral hydrogen atom has one proton and one electron. Heating the atom breaks it into two parts: (1) a positively charged hydrogen ion, H+ (2) a negatively charged electron.

A liquid with ions is called an  electrolyte . A gas with lots of ions is called a  plasma (physics) plasma . When ions move, it is called  electricity . For example, in a wire, the metal ions do not move, but the electrons move as electricity. A positive ion and a negative ion will move together. Two ions of the same charge will move apart. When ions move they also make  magnetic field s .

Many ions are colourless. Elements in the  main group s in the  Periodic Table  form colourless ions. Some ions are coloured. The  transition metal s usually form coloured ions.

 Physics 
In  physics , atomic nuclei that have been completely ionized are called  charged particles . These are ones in  alpha radiation .
 
Ionization happens by giving atoms high energy. This is done using electrical  voltage  or by high-energy  ionizing radiation  or high  temperature . 

A  simple ion  is formed from a single atom.

 Polyatomic ions  are formed from a number of atoms. Polyatomic ions usually consist of all non-metal atoms. But sometimes the polyatomic ion can have a metallic atom too.

Positive ions are called  cation s . ref name fund  They are attracted to  cathode s (negatively charged  electrodes ).  ( Cation  is pronounced "cat eye on", not "kay shun".) All simple metal ions are cations.

Negative ions are called  anion s . ref name fund  They are attracted to  anode s (positively charged electrodes). All simple non-metal ions (except H sup + sup , which is a  proton ) are anions (except NH sub 4 sub sup + sup ). 

 Transition metal s can form more than one simple cation with different charges.

Most ions have a charge of less than 4, but some can have higher charges.

 Michael Faraday  was the first person to write a theory about ions, in 1830. In his theory, he said what the portions of molecules were like that moved to anions or cations.  Svante August Arrhenius  showed how this happened. He wrote this in his doctoral dissertation in 1884 ( University of Uppsala ). The university did not accept his theory at first (he only just passed his degree). But in 1903, he won the  Nobel Prize in Chemistry  for the same idea.

In  Greek language Greek   ion  is like the word "go". "Anion" and "cation" mean "up-goer" and "down-goer". "Anode" and "cathode" are "way up" and "way down".

 Common ions 
 valign top 
 class wikitable +Common cations
 style text-align: left Common name
 style text-align: left Formula
 style text-align: left Historic name
 colspan 3 style background:aliceblue; Simple cations 
 Aluminium Al sup 3+ sup 
 Barium Ba sup 2+ sup 
 Beryllium Be sup 2+ sup 
 Calcium Ca sup 2+ sup 
 Chromium(III) Cr sup 3+ sup 
 Copper(I) Cu sup + sup cuprous
 Copper(II) Cu sup 2+ sup cupric
 Hydrogen H sup + sup 
 Iron(II) Fe sup 2+ sup ferrous
 Iron(III) Fe sup 3+ sup ferric
 Lead(II) Pb sup 2+ sup plumbous
 Lead(IV) Pb sup 4+ sup plumbic
 Lithium Li sup + sup 
 Magnesium Mg sup 2+ sup 
 Manganese(II) Mn sup 2+ sup 
 Mercury(II) Hg sup 2+ sup mercuric
 Potassium   K sup + sup kalic  
 Silver Ag sup + sup argentous
 Sodium Na sup + sup natric  
 Strontium Sr sup 2+ sup 
 Tin(II) Sn sup 2+ sup stannous
 Tin(IV) Sn sup 4+ sup stannic
 Zinc Zn sup 2+ sup 
 colspan 3 style background:aliceblue; Polyatomic cations 
 Ammonium chem NH 4 + 
 Hydronium H sub 3 sub O sup + sup 
 Mercury(I) chem Hg 2 2+ mercurous
 
 valign top 
 class wikitable +Common anions
 style text-align: left Formal name
 style text-align: left Formula
 style text-align: left Alt. name
 colspan 3 style background:aliceblue; Simple anions 
 Azide chem N 3 - 
 Bromide Br sup - sup 
 Chloride Cl sup - sup 
 Fluoride F sup - sup 
 Hydride H sup - sup 
 Iodide I sup - sup 
 Nitride N sup 3- sup 
 Oxide O sup 2- sup 
 Sulfide S sup 2- sup 
 colspan 3 style background:aliceblue; Oxoanions 
 Carbonate chem CO 3 2- 
 Chlorate chem ClO 3 - 
 Chromate chem CrO 4 2- 
 Dichromate chem Cr 2 O 7 2- 
 Dihydrogen phosphate chem H 2 PO 4 - 
 Hydrogen carbonate chem HCO 3 - bicarbonate
 Hydrogen sulfate chem HSO 4 - bisulfate
 Hydrogen sulfite chem HSO 3 - bisulfite
 Hydroxide OH sup - sup 
 Hypochlorite ClO sup - sup 
 Monohydrogen phosphate chem HPO 4 2- 
 Nitrate chem NO 3 - 
 Nitrite chem NO 2 - 
 Perchlorate chem ClO 4 - 
 Permanganate chem MnO 4 - 
 Peroxide chem O 2 2- 
 Phosphate chem PO 4 3- 
 Sulfate chem SO 4 2- 
 Sulfite chem SO 3 2- 
 Superoxide chem O 2 - 
 Thiosulfate chem S 2 O 3 2- 
 Silicate chem SiO 4 4- 
 Metasilicate (disambiguation) Metasilicate chem SiO 3 2- 
 Aluminium silicate chem AlSiO 4 - 
 colspan 3 style background:aliceblue; Anions from organic acids 
 Acetate chem CH 3 COO - ethanoate
 Formate chem HCOO - methanoate
 Oxalate chem C 2 O 4 2- ethanedioate
 Cyanide CN sup - sup 
 
 

  Other meanings  
In  Greek mythology ,  Ion  was a son of  Xuthus  and  Creusa .  He founded the  Ionia n  race (sociology) race  and became a  king of Athens king  of  Athens .
The term is also used for an element of the  Plato  texts, and a  Window manager .

  References  
 references 
  See also  
 List of ions 
 Category:Chemistry