Soap

File:Tualetsapo.jpg thumb|right|A bar of soap 
 Soap  is a  chemical compound  resulting from the reaction of an alkali (commonly sodium or potassium hydroxide) with a fatty acid. When mixed with  water  during  bath ing or  washing , they help people and clothes get  hygiene clean  by lowering the chance of  dirt  and  oil  to get to the skin or  fabric . Soaps are made from  animal   fat s or  vegetable   oil s. There are two basic steps in making soap. They are called Saponification and Salting-out of soap.

Soap cleans very well in  soft water . It is not  Toxicity toxic  to water life. It can be broken down by  bacteria . However, it is slightly  Solubility soluble  in water, so it is not often used in  washing machine s. It does not work well in  hard water . It cannot be used in strongly  acid ic  solution s. Hand soaps are only acidic enough to remove unwanted skin oils. For other forms of oil, Dishwashing soap is acidic enough to remove almost all forms of oil without damaging other petrolium products such as Plastic. It does not damage skin either.
Soap are the metallic salts of long chain fatty acids. 

Many soap experts say that soap can be made in many ways. Humanity has used soap-like things for at least 4000  year s. The earliest recorded evidence of the making of soap-like materials dates back to around 2800 BC in Ancient  Babylon . ref cite book   last   Willcox   first   Michael   editor   Hilda Butler   title   Poucher's Perfumes, Cosmetics and Soaps   edition   10th edition   year   2000   publisher   Kluwer Academic Publishers   location   Dordrecht   pages   453   chapter   Soap   quote  The earliest recorded evidence of the production of soap-like materials dates back to around 2800 BCE in ancient Babylon. ref  A recipe for soap having  water ,  alkali  and  Cinnamomum aromaticum cassia  oil was written on a Babylonian clay tablet around 2200 BC. 

The  Ebers papyrus  (Egypt, 1550 BC) suggests that  ancient Egypt ians bathed commonly and had animal and vegetable oils with alkaline  salt s to make a soap-like substance. Egyptian  wikt:document documents  say that a soap-like substance was used in the preparation of  wool  for  weaving .

 References 
 reflist 

 Other links 
 Soap made from human corpses 

 Category:Care