Natural resource

Image:Windmills D1-D4 - Thornton Bank.jpg thumb|150px|The natural resource of wind powers these 5MW wind turbines on this  wind farm  in  Belgium 

A  natural resource  is anything that people can use which comes from the  natural environment .  People do not make natural resources, but gather them.  Examples of natural resources are  air ,  water ,  wood ,  Crude oil oil ,  wind energy ,   iron , and  coal . Refined oil and  hydro-electric energy  are not natural resources because people make them.

  Supply  
We often say there are two sorts of natural resources: renewable resources and non-renewable resources.
 A  renewable resource  is one which can be used again and again. For example,  soil ,  sunlight  and  water  are renewable resources. However, in some circumstances, even water is not renewable easily.  Wood  is a renewable resource, but it takes time to renew and in some places people use the land for something else. Soil, if it blows away, is not easy to renew.
 A  non-renewable resource  is a resource that does not grow and come back, or a resource that would take a very long time to come back. For example,  coal  is a non-renewable resource. When we use coal, there is less coal afterward. One day, there will be no more of it to make  Product (consumer goods) goods . The non-renewable resource can be used directly (for example, burning oil to cook), or we can find a renewable resource to use (for example, using wind energy to make  electricity  to cook).  
 File:P0000003283(35755)(NRCS Photo Gallery).jpg thumb|Soil, a natural resource for farming 
Most natural resources are limited. This means they will eventually run out. A perpetual resource has a never-ending supply. Some examples of perpetual resources include  solar energy ,  tidal energy , and  wind energy . ref ASTM E60  E2114-08 Standard terminology for sustainability , ASTM, 2008, pp. 611-618 ISBN 978-0-8031-572 ref  

Some of the things influencing supply of resources include whether it is able to be  Recycling recycled , and the availability of suitable substitutes for the material.  Non-renewable resources cannot be recycled.  For example,  fossil fuel s cannot be recycled.

  Demand  
The  demand  for resources can change with new  technology , new needs, and new  economics  (e.g. changes in cost of the resources). Some material can go completely out of use, if people do not want it any more. Demand of many natural resources is very high, but availability of some, such as  precious metal s, is very low. 

  Availability  
All places have their own natural resources.When people do not have a certain resource they need, they can either replace it with another resource, or  trade  with another country to get the resource. People have sometimes  war fought  to have them (for example,  spice s, water, arable land,  gold , or  petroleum ).

When people do not have some natural resources, their quality of life can get lower. So, we need to protect our resources from pollution. For example, when they can not get clean water, people may become  disease ill ; if there is not enough wood, trees will be cut and the forest will disappear over time ( deforestation ); if there are not enough fish in a sea, people can die of  starvation .  Renewable resources include  crop s, wind, hydroelectric power, fish, and sunlight. Many people carefully save their natural resources so that others can use them in future.

  References  
 reflist 

  Other websites  
 http://www.science.org.au/nova/newscientist/027ns_005.htm?id=mg19426051.200&print=true Earth's natural wealth: an audit 

 Category:Natural resources   
 Category:Economics