Diarrhea

Diarrhea  (DIE-uh-REE-uh), also spelled  diarrhoea , happens when the body makes more watery  feces  than normal.  Diarrhea can occur in humans as well as most other  mammals .

  Causes  
Diarrhea is not a  disease .  But it may be a  symptom  of a disease.  The most common causes of diarrhea are: ref name Mayo cite web  url http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/diarrhea/basics/causes/con-20014025   title Diarrhea - Causes  author   date June 11, 2013  website www.mayoclinic.org  publisher The Mayo Clinic  accessdate December 26, 2015  quote ref 
   Virus es, like Norovirus (the most common cause of viral  gastroenteritis --"stomach flu"--in humans)
   Bacteria , like  Escherichia coli E. coli  or  Clostridium difficile C. diff 
  Some  Medication medicines , especially  antibiotics 
   Food poisoning 
   Lactose intolerance 
   Artificial sweetener s, like sorbitol and mannitol, which are in many sugar-free food products like sugarless gum
  Other problems with the  intestine s, like  Crohn's disease  and irritable bowel syndrome

  Child death  
In  developing nation s, diarrheal diseases are the second most common cause of  death  in children under age 5. ref name WHO cite web  url http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs330/en/   title Diarrhoeal Disease  author   date April 2013  website www.who.int  publisher The World Health Association  accessdate December 26, 2015  quote ref   Every year in the world, diarrhea kills around 760,000 children under age 5. ref name WHO 

In developing countries, diarrhea is also one of the most common causes of  malnutrition  in children under age 5. ref name WHO 

Usually, when children die from diarrhea, it is because of  dehydration  (losing too much water in the body). ref name WHO2 cite web  url http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/documents/9789241598415/en/   title Diarrhea: Why children are still dying and what can be done  author   date 2009  website www.who.int  publisher The World Health Organization and UNICEF  accessdate December 26, 2015  quote ref  Because diarrhea is watery, it takes away a lot of the water in the body.  It also takes away  electrolyte s--important salts that the body needs to survive.  Dehydration is extra dangerous for small children because they have less water in their bodies to begin with.  This means they cannot lose as much water as adults before they start to have serious health problems.

  Causes  
In developing countries, diarrhea is usually caused by an  infection  in the  intestine s.  These infections can be caused by  bacteria ,  virus es, or  Parasitism parasites .  These infections spread easily in some developing countries because: ref name WHO2 
  Drinking water is not safe.  Bacteria, viruses, and parasites often get into the water, which people then have to drink.  Anyone who drinks the water can then get an infection that causes diarrhea.
   Sanitation , like clean toilets, are often not available.  This makes it easier for infections to spread.
  Clean water and soap for washing hands are often not available either.  If people cannot wash their hands, bacteria, viruses, or parasites can stay on their hands.  Then they can spread them on their hands.

  Preventing child deaths  
Child deaths from diarrhea can be prevented in different ways.

  Re-hydration  
When a child is sick with diarrhea, the best way to keep them from dying is to rehydrate them (give them the water and electrolytes (salts) they are losing by having diarrhea).  If the child can go to a  clinic  or  hospital , this can be done by giving water and salts  Intravenous therapy intravenously  (through a  needle  placed into a  vein ).

If the child cannot go to a clinic or hospital, oral rehydration solution can be used.  ("Oral" means "given by mouth"; a " solution " is a mixture.)  Oral rehydration solution is a mixture of the most important things the body loses when it is dehydrated.  These things are clean water,  salt , and  Glucose sugar . ref name ORS cite web  url http://rehydrate.org/ors/made-at-home.htm/   title Oral Rehydration Solutions  author   date 2009  website www.rehydrate.org  publisher The Rehydration Project  accessdate December 26, 2015  quote ref   Some oral rehydration solutions have extra electrolytes, like  potassium , in them also.

Some oral rehydration solutions come in packets and just need to be mixed with clean water.  Oral rehydration solution can also be made at home.  If the water in the area is not safe, it can be  Boiling boiled  to make it safe.  (Boiling the water will kill any bacteria, viruses, or parasites in the water.)  Salt and sugar are then mixed into the water.  Drinking this mixture, after the water cools, will re-hydrate the child, if he drinks enough.  Adding a  banana  or  orange juice  can add potassium to the mixture. ref name ORS 

 Breastfeeding Breast milk  will also re-hydrate a child with diarrhea. ref name ORS 

  Preventing diarrhea  
There are some ways to prevent diarrhea, or the spread of diseases that cause diarrhea.  However, some of these ways are expensive and difficult to do.  These include: ref name WHO 
  Making drinking water safe
  Making sanitation better
  Making clean water and soap available for hand washing

  Related pages  
   Feces 

 References 
 references 

 Category:Symptoms