Football

Sports 
 File:Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi - Portugal vs Argentina, 9th February 2011.jpg thumb|Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi 
 Football  is a  sport . The most popular type of football is  Association football , which is also named "soccer". Although Football is old it is the most popular sport in the world. Football can also mean  American football  (gridiron),  rugby union ,  rugby league ,  Australian Rules Football ,  Gaelic football  or  Canadian football .

 File:Football (soccer ball).svg right|180px|thumb| Soccer 

The name  football  comes from the two words "foot" and "ball". It is named football because the players of the game walk and run (on foot) while playing, as opposed to polo and other games played on horseback. The ball is often kicked with the foot, but depending on the game, it can also be hit using other parts of the body (in association football) and handling the ball is a part of many other football variants.

The game started in  Middle Ages Medieval  England, but not the modern versions. Some elements of football have been seen in a wide variety of countries dating back to the second and third century in China. ref Cite web   url    http://www.history.co.uk/study-topics/history-of-football-tennis/history-of-football    publisher   AETN UK   accessdate  2015-05-11   title   History of Football ref  The modern games of both rugby football and association football are in the 19th century England. ref Green, Geoffrey (953;  The history of the Football Association . Naldrett Press, London ref ref Eisenberg, Christiane and Pierre Lanfranchi, eds. 2006: Football History: international perspectives. Special Issue,  Historical Social Research  31, ref 

In football, the ball is almost always shaped like a  sphere  or an  ellipsoid e. 

Types of football include:
   Association football Association football (soccer) 
   Rugby football 
   Rugby league  football
   Rugby union  football
   American football  (gridiron)
   College football 
   Touch rugby Touch Rugby  - Called "touch football" in Australia.
   Gaelic football 
   Australian Rules Football 
   Canadian football 

 References 
 reflist 


 sport-stub 

 Category:Football  