Solar System

File:Planets2008.jpg 300px|thumb|right| Planet s and  dwarf planet s of the Solar System. Compared with each other, the sizes are correct, but the distances are not 
 File:Solar System explained by simpleshow foundation.webm thumb|299x299px|A simple video explanation of the Solar System 

The  Solar System  is the  Sun  and all the objects in  orbit  around it. The Sun is orbited by  planet s,  asteroid s,  comet s and other things.

The Sun is a  star . It contains 99.9 percent of the Solar System's  mass . ref More precisely, 99.86 of its  known  mass. The total mass of the bodies in the  Oort cloud  is not known. Jupiter and Saturn account for 90% of the remaining 0.14%.  ref  This means that it has strong  gravity . The other objects are pulled into orbit around the Sun. The sun is mostly made out of hydrogen and helium.

There are eight  planet s in the Solar System. From closest to farthest from the Sun, they are:  Mercury (planet) Mercury ,  Venus ,  Earth ,  Mars ,  Jupiter ,  Saturn (planet) Saturn ,  Uranus  and  Neptune . The first four planets are called  terrestrial planet s. They are mostly made of  Rock (geology) rock  and  metal , and they are mostly  solid . The last four planets are called  gas giant s. This is because they are large planets that are mostly made of  gas . Even though they are made of gas, they have much more mass than the terrestrial planets.

The Solar System also contains other things.  There are  asteroid s, mostly between Mars and Jupiter.  Further out than Neptune, there is the  Kuiper belt  and the  scattered disc . These areas have  dwarf planet s, including  Pluto . There are thousands of very small objects in these areas. There are also comets,  Centaur (planetoid) centaurs , and there is  Cosmic dust interplanetary dust .

Six of the planets and three of the dwarf planets are orbited by  Satellite (natural) moons . Furthermore,  Cosmic dust planetary dust  orbits the gas giants. There are many other  Planetary system systems  like the Solar System in the universe. Each star has the potential to have a planetary system. There are more than 200  billion  stars in the  Milky Way   galaxy .

  Evolution of the Solar System  
 main Formation and evolution of the Solar System 
The formation and  wikt:evolution evolution  of the Solar System began 4.6 1000000000 (number) billion  years ago with the  gravitation al collapse of a small part of a giant  molecular cloud . ref citation first Bouvier, Audrey & Wadhwa, Meenakshi 2010  title The age of the Solar System redefined by the oldest Pb-Pb age of a meteoritic inclusion  doi 10.1038/ngeo941 journal Nature Geoscience volume 3 pages 637-641 br Date based on oldest inclusions found to date in  meteorite s, thought to be among the first solid material to form in the collapsing solar nebula. ref 

Most of the collapsing mass collected in the centre, forming the  Sun , while the rest flattened into a protoplanetary  disk  of loose dust, out of which the  planet s,  Natural satellite moons ,  asteroid s, and other Solar System bodies formed.

This widely accepted model, known as the  nebula r  hypothesis , was first developed in the 18th (1700's) century by  Emanuel Swedenborg ,  Immanuel Kant , and  Pierre-Simon Laplace . Its subsequent development has interwoven a variety of scientific disciplines including  astronomy ,  physics ,  geology , and  planetary science . As our knowledge of space has grown, the models have been changed to account for the new observations.

The Solar System has evolved considerably since its initial formation. Many moons have formed from circling discs of gas and dust around their parent planets, while other moons are believed to have formed independently and later been captured by their planets. Still others, as the  Earth 's  Moon , may be the result of  Giant impact hypothesis giant collision s. 

Many collisions between bodies have occurred, and have been important to the evolution of the Solar System. The positions of the planets often shifted, and planets have switched places. ref name Gomes cite journal   url http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v435/n7041/pdf/nature03676.pdf    title Origin of the cataclysmic Late Heavy Bombardment period of the terrestrial planets   author R. Gomes H.F.  et al    journal Nature   year 2005   volume 435   pages 466   doi 10.1038/nature03676 format PDF   pmid 15917802   issue 7041 ref ref cite journal   author  A. Morbidelli J.  et al    title  Source regions and timescales for the delivery of water to the Earth   journal  Meteoritics & Planetary Science   volume 35   pages 1309-1320   issn  1086-9379   year 2000 doi 10.1111/j.1945-5100.2000.tb01518.x  ref  This  planetary migration  is thought to have been responsible for much of the Solar System's early evolution.

  Earth's orbit  
The  Earth's orbit  around the Sun is nearly a perfect circle, but when mapped it is found that the  Earth  moves around the Sun in a very slightly oval shaped, called an  orbit elliptical orbit . The other  planet s in the Solar System also circle the Sun in slightly elliptical orbits.  Mercury (planet) Mercury  has a more elliptical orbit than the others, and some of the smaller objects orbit the Sun in very  orbit eccentric orbits .

  Discovery and exploration  
 Main History of astronomy 
For thousands of years, people had no need for a name for the "Solar System". They thought the Earth stayed still at the center of everything ( geocentrism ). Although the Greek philosopher  Aristarchus of Samos  suggested that there was a special order in the sky, ref cite journal title  The astronomical system of Copernicus author WC Rufus journal Popular Astronomy volume 31 pages 510 url http://adsabs.harvard.edu/full/1923PA.....31..510R accessdate 2009-05--09 ref   Nicolaus Copernicus  was the first to develop a  Mathematical model mathematical system  that described what we now call the "solar system". This was called a new "system of the world". In the 17th century,  Galileo Galilei ,  Johannes Kepler  and  Isaac Newton  began helping people understand  physics  more clearly. People began to accept the idea that the Earth is a planet and moves around the Sun, and that the planets are worlds with the same  physical law s that control Earth. More recently, telescopes and  space probe s have led to discoveries of  mountains  and  Impact crater craters , and  season al  meteorology meteorological  phenomena such as  clouds ,  dust storm s and  ice cap s on the other planets.

 File:Uklad Sloneczny 2006.png thumb|Planetary distances, not to scale 

  The eight planets  
In their order from the Sun:
 Mercury (planet) Mercury 
 Venus 
 Earth 
 Mars 
 Jupiter 
 Saturn (planet) Saturn 
 Uranus 
 Neptune 

The planets are the biggest objects that go around Sun.  It took people many years of using  telescope s to find the objects that were farthest away.   Planets beyond Neptune New planets  might still be found, and more small objects are found every year.  Most of the planets have  Satellite (natural) moons  that orbit around them just as the planets orbit the Sun. There are at least 173 of these moons in the solar system.

  Dwarf planets  
 Main Dwarf planet 

 Pluto  had been called a planet since it was discovered in 1930, but in 2006  astronomer s meeting at the  International Astronomical Union  decided on the definition of a planet, and Pluto did not fit. Instead they defined a new category of  dwarf planet , into which Pluto did fit, along with some others. These small planets are sometimes called  plutino s.
   Pluto 
   Ceres (dwarf planet) Ceres 
   Haumea (dwarf planet) Haumea 
   Eris (dwarf planet) Eris 
   Makemake (dwarf planet) Makemake 

  Structure  
There are a few main parts of the Solar System. Here they are in order from the Sun, with the planets numbered, and the  dwarf planet s marked with the letters a - e.

 File:Terrestrial planet size comparisons.jpg thumb|The inner planets. From left to right:  Mercury (planet) Mercury ,  Venus ,  Earth , and  Mars 

  Inner solar system  
The first four planets closest to the Sun are called the inner planets. They are small and dense terrestrial planets, with solid surfaces. They are made up of mostly rock and metal with a distinct internal structure and a similar size. Three also have an  atmosphere . The study of the four planets gives information about  geology  outside the Earth. Most  asteroid s are also often counted with the inner planets

   Terrestrial planet big Terrestrial planets big  region contains the four planets closest to the sun, all are rocky planets
   (1)   Mercury (planet) Mercury 
   (2)   Venus 
   (3)   Earth 
   (4)   Mars 
   big Asteroid belt big  region contains;
   (a)   Ceres (dwarf planet) Ceres  (the only  dwarf planet  in this region)
   Asteroid s

  Outer solar system  
   big gas giant Gas giant planets big  region contains;
   (5)   Jupiter 
   (6)   Saturn (planet) Saturn 
   (7)   Uranus 
   (8)   Neptune 

  Trans-Neptune region  

   big Kuiper belt big  region contains;
   (b)   Pluto (dwarf planet) Pluto 
   (c)   Haumea (dwarf planet) Haumea 
   (d)   Makemake (dwarf planet) Makemake 
   Kuiper belt Kuiper belt objects  and possibly other dwarf planets
  short-period  comet s
   big scattered disc big  region contains;
   (e)   Eris (dwarf planet) Eris 
   Scattered disc Scattered disk objects  and possibly other dwarf planets

  Oort Cloud   
The  Oort cloud  is separate from the  trans-Neptune region , and much farther out. It contains the long-period  comet s. 

  Ecliptic plane  
The  plane of the  ecliptic  is defined by the Earth's orbit around the Sun. All of the planets orbit the Sun roughly around this same  Orbital plane (astronomy) orbital plane . The farther away from this plane a planet orbits, the more  inclined  is its orbit to the ecliptic. If you could look at the solar system "edge on" then all the planets would be orbiting more or less in the plane of the ecliptic.

  References  
 Reflist 

  More reading  
 cite book first Kenneth R. last Lang title The Cambridge guide to the Solar System publisher Cambridge University Press edition 2nd date 2011  ISBN 9780521198578

  Other websites  
 commons category 
   http://www.solarviews.com/eng/homepage.htm Views of the Solar System 
   http://www.exploratorium.edu/ronh/weight/index.html Your Weight on Other Worlds 
   http://en.citizendium.org/wiki/Solar_System Solar System  Citizendium

 wikibooks Wikijunior:Solar System 
 Solar System 
 Category:Solar System  