Dimension

File:Squarecubetesseract.png right|thumb|385px|From left to right, the  square (geometry) square , the  cube , and the  tesseract . The square is bounded by 1-dimensional lines, the cube by 2-dimensional areas, and the tesseract by 3-dimensional volumes. A  Projection (linear algebra) projection  of the cube is given since it is viewed on a two-dimensional screen. The same applies to the tesseract, which additionally can only be shown as a projection even in three-dimensional space. 
 File:Dimension levels.svg right|thumb|400px|A diagram of the first four spatial dimensions. 

 Dimensions  are a concept from  mathematics  and  physics : One way to define a dimension is to look at the  degree of freedom degrees of freedom  a movement has in a specific space. There are different concepts where the term dimension is used and there are also different definitons. There is no definition that can satisfy all concepts. 

In a  vector space , a dimension is equal to the   cardinality  of the minimal  Generator (mathematics) generator . It is also equal to the cardinality of the maximal set of  linear independence linearly independent   vector s of that space. "Normal" objects in everyday life are specified by three dimenensions, which are usually called  length ,  width  and  depth . Mathematicians call this concept  Euclidean space .

Dimensions can be used to measure  position  too. The  distance  to a position from a  start ing place can be measured in the length, width and height  direction s. These distances are a measure of the position.

Sometimes a fourth ( 4D ) dimension,  time , is used to show the  position  of an  event  in  time  and  Space (physics) space .

 Other Dimensions 
In  modern   science , people use other dimensions.

Dimensions like  temperature  and  weight  can be used to show the position of something in less simple  Space (physics) spaces .

 Mathematician s also use dimensions. In mathematics, dimensions are more general. Dimensions in mathematics might not measure things in the  world . The  rule s for doing  arithmetic  with dimensions in mathematics might be different than usual arithmetic rules.

 Dimensions and vectors 
 Vector s are used to show distances and directions. Vectors are often used in  engineering  and  science , and sometimes in   mathematics .

A vector is a list of  number s. There is one number for each dimension. There are arithmetic rules for vectors.

For example, if Jane wants to know the position of Sally, Sally can give Jane a vector to show the position. If Jane and Sally are in the world, there are three dimensions. Therefore, Sally gives Jane a list of three numbers to show her position. The three numbers in the vector Sally gives Jane might be:
  Sally's distance north of Jane
  Sally's distance east of Jane
  Sally's height above Jane

 Category:Geometry 
 Category:Algebra