1982

Year nav 1982 
 1982  ( MCMLXXXII ) was a  common year  starting on  Friday  of the  Gregorian calendar .

  Events  
   January 15  -  K.C. and the Sunshine Band 's  Harry Wayne Casey  is seriously injured in an automobile accident in  Miami, Florida .
   January 17  -  Tommy Tucker , writer of "Hi Heel Sneakers", dies of carbon tetrachloride poisoning sustained while he was finishing floors in his home.
   January 20  -  Ozzy Osbourne  bites the head off of a live bat thrown at him during a performance. Osbourne is hospitalized with  rabies .
   January 21  -  B.B. King  donates his personal record collection, which includes nearly 7,000 rare blues records, to the  University of Mississippi 's Center for the Study of Southern Culture.
   February 13  - A 300-pound gravestone from the grave of  Lynyrd Skynyrd  singer  Ronnie Van Zant  is stolen from an  Orange Park, Florida  cemetery. Police found the gravestone two weeks later in a dry river bed.
   February 20  -  Pat Benatar  marries her guitarist,  Neil Giraldo  on the  Hawaii an island of  Maui .
   March 4  -  Frank Zappa 's son  Dweezil Zappa Dweezil  and daughter  Moon Unit Zappa Moon Unit  form  Fred Zeppelin .
   March 5  - Comedian and  The Blues Brothers Blues Brother   John Belushi  is found dead of an apparent drug overdose in the  Chateau Marmont Hotel  in  Los Angeles, California .
   March 18  -  Teddy Pendergrass  is severely injured in a car accident in  Philadelphia . Pendergrass' injuries result in him being paralyzed from the waist down. ref cite web url http://news.yahoo.com/s/ap/20100114/ap_en_mu/us_obit_pendergrass;_ylt=AoJILP7rD3kJcsFniI1jcr8DW7oF;_ylu=X3oDMTJvYm5qbWZiBGFzc2V0A2FwLzIwMTAwMTE0L3VzX29iaXRfcGVuZGVyZ3Jhc3MEcG9zAzIEc2VjA3luX2FydGljbGVfc3VtbWFyeV9saXN0BHNsawNyYnNpbmdlcnBlbmQ- title R&B singer Pendergrass dead in Pa. at 59 accessdate 2010-01-14 ref 
   March 19  -  Ozzy Osbourne 's lead guitarist,  Randy Rhoads  is killed in a freak accident in  Leesburg, Florida  when the plane he's riding in buzzes Osbourne's tour bus and crashes into a house. The plane's pilot and a female passenger are also killed.
   March 28  - In  Los Angeles, California ,  David Crosby  is arrested for possession of Quaaludes and drug paraphernalia, driving under the influence of  cocaine  and carrying a  concealed weapon .
   March 29  -  Stevie Wonder  and  Paul McCartney  release their single " Ebony and Ivory ".
   March 31  -  The Doobie Brothers  announce that they are breaking up.
   April 2  - The  Falklands War  begins.
   April 15  -  Billy Joel  is seriously injured in a motorcycle accident in  Long Island, New York . Joel spends over a month in the hospital undergoing physical therapy for his hand.
   April  -  Amy Grant  marries  Gary Chapman .
   April 26  -  Rod Stewart  is mugged in  Los Angeles, California . Stewart loses his $50,000 Porsche to the mugger, but was not hurt.
   June 20  - The  Falklands War  ends.
   August 17  - The first mass production of  compact disc s begins in  Langenhagen  near  Hanover ,  Germany .
   September 7  - The musical  Cats (musical) Cats  begins its 18-year run on  Broadway .
   September 30  - The TV show  Cheers  premieres.
   November 5  - First broadcast of The Tube was shown on Channel 4 in the UK.
   November 13  -  Vietnam Veterans Memorial  dedicated.

  Births  
   February 14  -  Marian Gaborik ,  Czechoslovakia Slovak  professional ice hockey player
   June 21  -  Prince William, Duke of Cambridge 
 August 6  - David Knazovicky

  Deaths  
   January 10  - Paul Lynde, comedian
   February 12 - Victor Jory, Canadian actor (born 1902)
   March 5  -  John Belushi , actor
   March 29  -  Carl Orff , German composer
   August 12  -  Henry Fonda , actor
   September 5  -  Douglas Bader , RAF Fighter pilot
   November 10  -  Leonid Brezhnev , leader of the  Soviet Union 
   August 27  -  Sri Anandamayi Ma ,Hindu spiritual teacher and  Guru  from  Bengal 

  Movies released  
   48 Hrs. 
   Annie 
   The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas 
   Blade Runner 
   Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean 
   Conan the Barbarian 
   Das Boot 
   Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid 
   Death Wish II 
   E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial 
   Fanny and Alexander 
   Fast Times at Ridgemont High 
   First Blood 
   Frances 
   Friday the 13th, Part 3 
   Gandhi (movie) Gandhi 
   Grease 2 
   Halloween III: Season of the Witch 
   Megaforce (movie) Megaforce 
   Missing 
   My Favorite Year 
   An Officer and a Gentleman 
   Parasite 
   Poltergeist movies Poltergeist 
   Porky's 
   Richard Pryor Live on Sunset Strip 
   The Road Warrior 
   Rocky III , starring  Sylvester Stallone 
   The Secret of NIMH 
   Sophie's Choice 
   Star Trek: The Wrath of Khan 
   Time Stands Still 
   Tootsie 
   Tron (movie) Tron 
   The Verdict 
   Veronika Voss 
   Victor/Victoria 
   The World According to Garp 
   Yol 

  Hit songs  
  "867-5309 Jenny" -  Tommy Tutone 
  "Always On My Mind" -  Willie Nelson 
  "Believer" -  Ozzy Osbourne 
  "Body Language" -  Queen (band) Queen 
  "The Day Before You Came" -  ABBA 
  "Don't Talk To Strangers" -  Rick Springfield 
  "Electric Eye" -  Judas Priest 
  "Even the Nights are Better" -  Air Supply 
  "Eye In The Sky" -  Alan Parsons Project 
  "Flying High Again" -  Ozzy Osbourne 
  "Freeze Frame" -  J. Geils Band 
  "Gloria" -  Laura Branigan 
  "Gypsy" -  Fleetwood Mac 
  "Head Over Heels" -  ABBA 
  "Heart Attack" -  Olivia Newton-John 
  "Heat Of The Moment" -  Asia (band) Asia 
  "Hold Me" -  Fleetwood Mac 
  "Hungry Like The Wolf" -  Duran Duran 
  "Hurts So Good" -  John Cougar Mellencamp John Cougar 
  "I'm Afraid of Me" -  Culture Club 
  "Invisible Sun" -  The Police 
  "Love Will Turn You Around" -  Kenny Rogers 
  "Make A Move On Me" -  Olivia Newton-John 
  "The Message" -  Grandmaster Flash 
  "Open Arms" -  Journey (band) Journey 
  "Our Lips Are Sealed" -  The Go-Gos 
  "Over The Mountain" -  Ozzy Osbourne 
  "Planet Rock" -  Afrika Bambaataa 
  "Pressure" -  Billy Joel 
  "Quiero Ser" -  Menudo 
  " Rock The Casbah " -  The Clash 
  "Rosanna" -  Toto (band) Toto 
  "Shake It Up" -  The Cars 
  "Since You're Gone" -  The Cars 
  "Spirits In The Material World" -  The Police 
  "Still They Ride" -  Journey (band) Journey 
  "Sube A Mi Motora" -  Menudo 
  "Time (Clock of the Heart)" -  Culture Club 
  "TV Party" -  Black Flag (band) Black Flag 
  "Twilight Zone" -  Golden Earring 
  "Vacation" -  The Go-Gos 
  "Valley Girl" -  Frank Zappa 
  "We Got The Beat" -  The Go-Gos 
  "White Boy" -  Culture Club 
  "You Can't Hurry Love" -  Phil Collins 
  "You Should Hear How She Talks About You" -  Melissa Manchester 
  "You've Got Another Thing Comin'" -  Judas Priest 

  New books  
   Jumanji  by  Chris Van Allsburg 

  Nobel Prizes  
   Nobel Prize in Physics Physics  -  Kenneth G. Wilson , American physicist
   Nobel Prize in Chemistry Chemistry  -  Aaron Klug 
   Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Physiology or Medicine  -  Sune K Bergstrom ,  Bengt I Samuelsson ,  John R Vane 
   Nobel Prize in Literature Literature  -  Gabriel Garcia Marquez , Colombian novelist and journalist
   Nobel Peace Prize Peace  -  Alva Myrdal  and  Alfonso Garcia Robles Alfonso Garcia Robles 
   Nobel Prize in Economics Economics  -  George Stigler 

  References  
 Commonscat 1982 
 reflist 

 Category:1982  