Fold (geology)

File:Folded Rock.jpg 230px|right|thumb|Very tight folds in  New South Wales ,  Australia 
 Image:Kielce-slichowice2.jpg thumb|230px|A fold in Slichowice nature reserve in  Kielce ,  Poland  (Variscan  orogeny ) 
 File:Rainbow_Basin.JPG thumb|210px|Rainbow Basin Syncline near Barstow,  California ,  United States 

The term  fold  is used in  geology  when one or a stack of originally flat, level surfaces, such as  sediment ary  strata , are bent or curved as a result of  pressure  and high temperature. The basic cause is likely to be some aspect of  plate tectonics . 

When two forces act towards each other from opposite sides, rock layers are bent into  folds . The process by which folds are formed due to  compression  is known as  folding . Folding is one of the  endogenetic process es; it takes place within the Earth's  Crust (geology) crust . 

Folds in rocks vary in size from microscopic crinkles to mountain-sized folds. They occur singly as isolated folds and in extensive fold trains of different sizes, on a variety of scales. A set of folds distributed on a regional scale constitutes a  fold belt , a common feature of  orogeny orogenic zones . 

There are large-scale and small-scale folds. Large-scale folds are found mainly along a  collision boundary  between two  tectonic plate s. 

  Structure of a fold  
The upfold is called an anticline. The downfold is called a syncline.

The imaginary line joining the highest points along the upfold is called the crest line. 

The  flanks  of a fold are known as the limbs.

The central line from which the rock strata dip away in opposing directions is called the axis of fold.

According to the degree of folding of the layers, folds can be classified into five main types.
  symmetrical fold: two limbs are of equal steepness
  Asymmetrical fold: one limb is steeper than the other
  Overfold: one limb is pushed over the other
  Recumbent fold: two limbs are nearly parallel
  Overthrust fold: compressional force is so great that the rock strata are broken and slide over the other.

  Formation of a fold mountain  
Large depressions called geosynclines form between plates. Seas filled the geosynclines and rivers flowing into them carried sediments (sand and silt) which build up on the sea bed.
Over millions of years the sediments were compressed, by their own weight, into sedimentary rocks, e.g. sandstone, limestone etc.

  Landforms formed by folding  

Large-scale folding will develop parallel ranges of round-top mountains along destructive plate boundaries. These mountains are known as  fold mountain s. 

Examples of fold mountain ranges:
   Himalayas 
   Alps 
   Andes 
   Rocky Mountains 
 

 Category:Geology