Kahoolawe

complex date February 2012 

 Kaho okina olawe  is the smallest of the 8 main  volcano volcanic  islands in the  Hawaiian Islands , in the  United States .  It is west of  Maui  and south of  Lanai Lana okina i  and is 11 miles long by  convert 6 mi km abbr on  across ( convert 45 sqmi km2 disp or abbr on ). The highest point, Lua Makika, is  convert 1477 ft m  above sea level. The island is rather dry because its low height does not cause much  rain  ( orographic precipitation ) to fall from the northeastern  trade winds .

Kaho okina olawe was used as a gunfire and bombing target by the United States  military  because of  World War II , and a defense training area by the  United States Navy  from around 1941 until May 1994.  Popular feeling in Hawai okina i against this practice finally won, and the Navy has been trying to finish a cleanup of unexploded ordnance (bombs and explosive shells) from the island.  Ordnance is still buried or lying on the ground. Other items have washed down gullies and still other unexploded ordnance is underwater offshore. In 1981, the entire island was included on the  National Register of Historic Places .

The island is planned to be given back to the Hawaiian people.  In 1993, the  United States Congress U.S. Congress  passed a law that "recognized the cultural importance of the island, required the Navy to return the island to the State, and directed the Navy to do an unexploded ordnance (UXO) cleanup and environmental restoration"  http://www.state.hi.us/kirc/main/home.htm . The turnover officially occurred on  November 11 ,  2003 , but the cleanup has not yet been completed. The U.S. Navy was given $400 million and 10 years to complete the large cleanup task, but this work has gone much slower than planned.

In 1993, the  Hawaii  State  Legislature  established the Kaho okina olawe Island Reserve. It is made up of the whole island and waters out to  convert 2 mi km abbr on  from shore. By State Law, Kaho okina olawe and its waters can only be used for Native Hawaiian  cultural ,  spiritual , and  subsistence  purposes; fishing;  environmental restoration ;  historic preservation ; and  education . Commercial uses are not allowed. The Legislature also created the Kaho okina olawe Island Reserve Commission (KIRC) to manage the Reserve while it is held in trust for a "future Native Hawaiian Sovereignty entity"  http://www.state.hi.us/kirc/main/home.htm . 

After the cleanup is finished, the restoration of Kaho okina olawe will need ways to control  erosion , restore the plant life, recharge the  water table , and slowly replace alien plants with native ones. Plans will include methods for damming gullies and reducing rainwater runoff. Non-natives will temporarily stabilize some areas before the permanent planting of native plants.

  Other websites  
 http://www.state.hi.us/kirc/main/home.htm Kaho okina olawe Island Reserve Commission 

 Category:Islands of Hawaii 
 Category:Volcanoes of Hawaii