A

more sources date February 2012 

   This page is about the first  letter  in the  alphabet .
   For the indefinite article, see  Article (grammar) . 
   For other uses of A, see  A (disambiguation) 

 A-Z 
 File:A cursiva.gif thumb 
 A  is the first letter of the  English language English   alphabet . The small letter,  a , is used as a lower case  vowel . However, the English long  a  (a) is said as a  diphthong  of e and y. The same letter of the  Greek alphabet  is named  alpha (letter) alpha . Alpha and  omega (letter) omega , the last letter of the Greek alphabet, means the beginning and the end. In  musical notation , the letter A is the symbol of a note in the scale, below  B  and above  G . In  binary  numbers, the letter A is 01000001.

A is the letter that was used to represent a team in an old  TV  show,  The A-Team .

 Where it came from 
The earliest letter 'A' has appeared was in the Phoenician alphabet's  aleph . ref name Britannica  This symbol came from a simple picture of an  ox  head. 
 class wikitable style background-color:#EEEEEE; text-align:center;  Egyptian
  Phoenician  br aleph 
  Greek  br Alpha (letter) Alpha 
  Etruscan  br A
  Roman/Cyrillic  br A
 style background-color:white; text-align:center; File:EgyptianA-01.svg Egyptian hieroglyphic ox head 
 File:PhoenicianA-01.svg Phoenician aleph 
 File:Alpha uc lc.svg 65px|Greek alpha 
 File:EtruscanA.svg Etruscan A 
 File:RomanA-01.svg Roman A 
 

This Phoenician letter helped make the basic blocks of later types of the letter. The Greeks later modified this letter and used it as their letter  Alpha (letter) alpha . The Greek alphabet was used by the  Etruscan civilization Etruscans  in northern Italy, and the Romans later modified the Etruscan alphabet for their own language.

 Using the letter 
The letter A has six different sounds. It can sound like ae, in the  International Phonetic Alphabet , such as the word  pad . Other sounds of this letter are in the words  father , which developed into another sound, such as in the word  ace''.

 Use in mathematics 
In algebra, the letter "A" along with other letters at the beginning of the alphabet is used to represent known quantities.

In geometry, capital A, B, C etc. are used to label  line segment s,  Line (geomotry) lines , etc. Also, A is typically used as one of the letters to label an angle in a triangle.

 References 
 Reflist refs 
 ref name Britannica "A", "Encyclopaedia Britannica", Volume 1, 1962. p.1. ref  
 

 wikt 
 commonscat 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Letters (alphabet) 
 Category:Vowel letters 

 new:prithibii