Earthquake

File:Eq-prob.jpg thumb|right|250px| San Francisco  Bay earthquake prediction 
 File:Sanfranciscoearthquake1906.jpg thumb|250px|Damage from the  San Francisco ,  California  earthquake in 1906 
 File:Fault types.png thumb|right|Fault types 

An  earthquake  (or quakes, tremors) is shaking of the surface of earth, caused by  wikt:sudden sudden  movement in the  Crust (geology) Earth's crust . They can be extremely violent.

Earthquakes are usually quite brief, but may repeat. They are the result of a sudden release of energy in the  Earth's crust . This creates seismic waves, which are waves of energy that travel through the Earth.  The study of earthquakes is called  seismology . ref name camilla cite book   last     first     authorlink     coauthors     title   Earth Science  publisher   Holt, Rinehart Winston  date   2001  location   Austin,  Texas  78746-6487  pages     url     doi     id     isbn   0-03-055667-8 ref Seismology studies the frequency, type and size of earthquakes over a period of time. 

There are  large  earthquakes and  small  earthquakes. Large earthquakes can take down buildings and cause death and injury. Earthquakes are measured using observations from  seismometer s. The magnitude of an earthquake, and the intensity of shaking, is usually reported on the  Richter scale . On the scale, 3 or less is scarcely noticeable, and magnitude 7 (or more) causes damage over a wide area.

An earthquake under the  ocean  can cause a  tsunami .  This can cause just as much death and destruction as the earthquake itself.   Landslide s can happen, too. Earthquakes are part of the Earth's  rock cycle . 

  History  
Earthquakes sometimes hit cities and kill hundreds of thousands of people. Most earthquakes happen along the  Pacific Ring of Fire  but the biggest ones mostly happen in other places. Tectonically active places are places where earthquakes or  volcanic eruption s are frequent.

The  Ancient China ancient Chinese  used a device that looked like a jar with  dragon s on the top surrounded by frogs with their mouths open. When an earthquake occurred, a ball fitted into each dragon's mouth would drop out of the dragon's mouth into the frog's. The position of the frog which received a ball indicated the direction of the earthquake. This was one of the first tools to help figure out where an earthquake originated from.

  Causes of an earthquake   
 main plate tectonics 
Earthquakes are caused by tectonic movements in the Earth's crust. The main cause is that when  Plate tectonics tectonic plates  collide, one rides over the other, causing  orogeny  (mountain building), earthquakes and  volcano es. 

The boundaries between moving plates form the largest  Fault (geology) fault  surfaces on Earth. When they stick, relative motion between the plates leads to increasing stress. This continues until the stress rises and breaks, suddenly allowing sliding over the locked portion of the fault, releasing the  Potential energy stored energy .

  Earthquake fault types  
 File:EastHanSeismograph.JPG thumb|Replica of ancient  seismometer  with pendulum sensitive to ground tremors. In  Luoyang  in 133 AD, it detected an earthquake 400 to 500 km (250 to 310 mi) away There are three main types of  Fault (geology) geological fault  that may cause an earthquake: normal, reverse (thrust) and strike-slip. Normal faults occur mainly in areas where the crust is being extended. Reverse faults occur in areas where the crust is being shortened. Strike-slip faults are steep structures where the two sides of the fault slip horizontally past each other.

  Earthquake clusters  
Most earthquakes form part of a sequence, related to each other in terms of location and time. ref name WAAFEC Cite web url http://earthquake.usgs.gov/eqcenter/step/explain.php title What are aftershocks, foreshocks, and earthquake clusters? ref  Most earthquake clusters consist of small tremors which cause little to no damage, but there is a theory that earthquakes can recur in a regular pattern. ref cite web url http://earthquake.usgs.gov/research/parkfield/repeat.php title Repeating earthquakes publisher United States Geological Survey date January 29, 2009 accessdate May 11, 2009 ref 

A  foreshock  is an earthquake that occurs before a larger earthquake, called the mainshock.  A foreshock is in the same area of the main shock but always of a smaller magnitude. ref name Gates cite book last1 Gates first1 A. last2 Ritchie first2 D. title Encyclopedia of Earthquakes and Volcanoes url http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=b1sXfJCiCHQC&pg=PA89 year 2006 publisher Infobase Publishing isbn 978-0-8160-6302-4 page 89 ref 

An  aftershock  is an earthquake that occurs after a previous earthquake, the mainshock. An aftershock is in the same region of the main shock but always of a smaller magnitude. Aftershocks are formed as the crust adjusts to the effects of the main shock. ref name WAAFEC 

 Earthquake swarms  are sequences of earthquakes striking in a specific area within a short period of time. They are different from earthquakes followed by a series of aftershocks by the fact that no single earthquake in the sequence is obviously the main shock, therefore none have notably higher magnitudes than the other. An example of an earthquake swarm is the 2004 activity at  Yellowstone National Park . ref Cite web url http://volcanoes.usgs.gov/yvo/2004/Apr04Swarm.html title Earthquake swarms at Yellowstone publisher USGS accessdate 2008-09-15 ref 

Sometimes a series of earthquakes occur in a sort of  earthquake storm , where the earthquakes strike a fault in clusters, each triggered by the shaking or stress redistribution of the previous earthquakes. Similar to aftershocks but on adjacent segments of fault, these storms occur over the course of years, and with some of the later earthquakes as damaging as the early ones. Such a pattern occurred in the North  Anatolia n fault in  Turkey  in the 20th century. ref cite journal   title   Poseidon's horses: plate tectonics and earthquake storms in the late [Bronze Age] Aegean and Eastern  Mediterranean    journal   Journal of Archaeological Science   year   2000   author   Amos Nur   issn   0305-4403   volume   27   pages   43-63   url    http://water.stanford.edu/nur/EndBronzeage.pdf    doi   10.1006/jasc.1999.0431  ref ref cite web   url    http://www.bbc.co.uk/science/horizon/2003/earthquakestorms.shtml    title   Earthquake storms   work   Horizon (BBCtv series)   date   9pm 1 April 2003   accessdate   2007-05-02  ref 

  Tsunami  
 main Tsunami 
 File:20110311Houshu.ogv thumb|right|Animation of the 2011 Sendai  tsunami . 
 Tsunami  or a  chain  of fast moving  wave s in the  ocean  caused by powerful earthquakes is a very serious challenge for people's safety and for  earthquake engineering . Those waves can inundate coastal areas, destroy  house s and even swipe away whole  town s. ref http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/recenteqsww/Quakes/usc0001xgp.php USGS Poster of the Near the East Coast of Honshu, Japan Earthquake of 11 March 2011 - Magnitude 8.9 ref 

Unfortunately, tsunamis can not be prevented. However, there are warning systems ref http://ptwc.weather.gov Pacific Tsunamy Warning Center ref  which may warn the  population  before the big waves reach the  land  to let them enough time to rush to safety.

  Earthquake-proofing  
 main Earthquake engineering 
Some places, such as  Japan  or  California , have many earthquakes and many inhabitants. There, it is good practice to construct  house s and other  building s which will resist collapse in an earthquake. This is called seismic design or " earthquake-proof ing".
 File:Haiti National Palace damaged.jpg thumb|The Haitian National Palace after at the  2010 Haiti earthquake . 

Earthquake-proof buildings are constructed to withstand the destructive force of an earthquake. This depends upon its type of construction, shape,  mass  distribution, and  wikt:rigid rigidity . Different combinations are used. Square, rectangular, and shell-shaped buildings can withstand earthquakes better than  skyscraper s. To reduce stress, a building's ground floor can be supported by extremely rigid, hollow columns, while the rest of the building is supported by flexible columns inside the hollow columns. Another method is to use rollers or rubber pads to separate the base columns from the ground, allowing the columns to shake parallel to each other during an earthquake.

To help prevent a roof from collapsing, builders make the roof out of light-weight materials. Outdoor walls are made with stronger and more reinforced materials such as steel or  reinforced concrete . During an earthquake flexible windows may help hold the windows together so they don't break.

  Sources  
 references 

  Related pages  
   Volcano 
   Earthquake engineering 

  Other websites  
 Commons category Earthquake damage 
   http://www.pbs.org/newshour/science/earthquake/ PBS NewsHour - Predicting Earthquakes 
   http://neic.usgs.gov/neis/eqlists/10maps_world.html USGS - Largest earthquakes in the world since 1900 
   http://www.armageddononline.org/earthquake.php The Destruction of Earthquakes  - a list of the worst earthquakes ever recorded
   http://earthquake.usgs.gov/eqcenter/recenteqsww/ Recent Quakes WorldWide 
   http://en.citizendium.org/wiki/Earthquake Earthquake  Citizendium
   http://www.emsc-csem.org/Earthquake/ Real Time Seismicity  European-Mediterranean Seismological Centre (EMSC)

 Category:Earthquakes * 
 Category:Plate tectonics 
__FORCETOC__