Comedy

File:Thalia sarcophagus Louvre Ma475.jpg thumb|right| Thalia (muse) Thalia , the muse of comedy, holding a comic mask - detail of "Muses Sarcophagus", the  nine Muses  and their attributes;  marble , early second century AD, Via Ostiense -  Louvre 
 File:Satyros Cdm Paris DeRidder509.jpg thumb|Satyr 
 File:Charlie Chaplin.jpg thumb|right| Charlie Chaplin , a well-known comedian 
 File:Oceanside High School Masque Society.jpg thumb|right|Poster with  masks  of comedy and tragedy 

 Comedy  (from  Greek language Greek : Komodia) may be used in different ways:
 A comedy is, in modern times, a  drama  which has a generally  funny  content and in general a happy ending. This definition is used for  theatre   Play (theatre) plays , and was first used in  Ancient Greek theatre Ancient Greece . 
 The word comedy is also used for  television  shows or  movie s that are funny, silly or that make people  laughter laugh . 
Comedies may also show people telling jokes and funny stories. People who are known for acting in comedies are  comedian s or comedic actors.

  History  
  Satire  
The ancient Greeks had comedies, which were presented in  competition s at the  festival  of  Dionysus Dionysia . 

One of the best-known comedy authors of the time was  Aristophanes  (about 446 ndash 386 BC). One of his works,  The Clouds  was performed 425 BC. The work did not survive completely, but a later version did survive. It is a satire against  Socrates , and pictures the great philosopher as a swaggering con artist. Some of the accusations were re-used at Socrates'  trial , twenty years later.  

Typical for satire are that the author criticizes society, and living people. 

  Satyr plays  
Another type of Ancient Greek theatre was the  satyr play . This was mock  drunkenness , brazen  sexuality  (including  Phallus phallic  props), pranks, sight gags, and general merriment. The modern equivalent would be knock-about comedy.

  Humour  
Humour, or 'New Comedy' is not about criticizing people or ideas, but rather about showing characters in funny situations. The most important Greek playwright of this type was probably  Menander . The best known  Ancient Rome Roman  comedy writer was  Plautus . He often used Greek comedies for his plays.

Many comedy plays were written in the 1500s by the British writer  William Shakespeare .
Shakespeare's comedy plays include:   All's Well That Ends Well ,  The Comedy of Errors ,  A Midsummer Nights Dream , and  Twelfth Night . In Shakespeare's day a comedy did not mean a play that would make people laugh or that had a lot of jokes. Instead it was a play in which all the problems work out all right in the end. This was unlike a tragedy, where the problems do not work out, usually resulting in someone's death.
The two masks, one was smiling, the other crying, often associated with theatre represent comedy and tragedy.

  Types  
  Slapstick  
There are different types of comedy. One type of comedy is called "slap stick comedy." In "slap stick comedy," people do silly things such as tripping, falling over or embarrassing themselves just to make people laugh. Slap stick comedy can be used in comedy movies or comedy television shows.

Slap stick comedy was used a lot in  silent movies silent (no sound) movies  from the 1920s. A comedian who acted in the silent movies who used a lot of slapstick comedy was  Charlie Chaplin . In the 1950s and 1960s, comedian  Jerry Lewis  also used silly slap stick comedy in his comedy movies.

  Comedy movies  
A comedy is a very popular type of movie. Some comedy movies have "slapstick comedy," in which people just do silly things such as tripping, falling over or embarrassing themselves just to make people laugh. Other comedy movies show funny stories or situations in which people are behaving in a silly manner. Some comedies make the audience laugh by showing strange or unusual images or situations that do not make sense.


  Parody/spoof  
A parody or spoof movie makes another movie, series or person look silly to make people laugh.
Imitating and exaggerating one movie in a funny manner to make people laugh 


  Different types of comedy movies  
Some types of comedy movies mix comedy with other types of movies. 
 There is a type of movie called a  dramedy , which is a mix of a drama movie and a comedy movie. 
 There is also a type of movie called a  romantic comedy  (sometimes called a "rom-com"). In romantic comedies, there is a love story about a couple who fall in love, along with silly or funny comedy parts.

  Comedy television shows  
Comedy shows are very popular on  television . Comedy shows on television are often called " situational comedies sitcoms ." The word "sitcom" is a shortened way of saying "situational comedy." Television situational comedies usually show characters who do silly or funny things which make the audience laugh.

 Related pages 
 Opera buffa 

 Ancient Greece: Arts and Culture 

 Category:Genres