Archaeology

File:GD-EG-Alex-Theatre031.JPG thumb|300 px|A  Ancient Rome Roman   theatre  in  Alexandria ,  Egypt 

 Archaeology  is the study of the  past  by looking for the remains and artifacts ( history historical things ) left by the people who lived long ago. These remains can include old  coin s,  tool s,  building s, and inscriptions.  Archaeologists, the people who study archaeology, use these remains to understand how people lived.

Archaeologists think it is important to understand the past, because so many people use the past to know where they come from.

  Fieldwork  
When archaeologists do fieldwork, they look for remains, often by digging deep in the ground. When things are found, or even when nothing is found, the results of the fieldwork are taken back to the place where the archaeologist's base is, maybe a  university  or  museum . They record everything they found by writing down on paper or entering the information into a computer, so that they can build a picture of everything that is found. As  Human settlement settlements  (places where people lived in groups) change and grow, old buildings are often buried to make space for new buildings. Ancient  Rome , for example, is now up to 40 feet (12 metres) below the present city. This is why archaeological fieldwork is expensive and why it takes a long time.

 Fields of interest 
 Archaeologist s do not all study the same  civilization s, they specialize in different areas of interest. Some fields of interest include  Ancient Egypt  (these specialists are called  Egyptologist s),  Ancient China , or the  Vikings . Archaeologists study every  civilization  that is known, especially the ones where there is no written  history . They can study any time period. For example, one might study the  human evolution beginning of human life  in Africa, or study  World War II . Marine archaeologists study things that are now underwater. They search for  shipwreck sunken ships  or  city cities  that have been lost under the sea.

 Sites 
 Stonehenge , in  England , is a famous archaeological site, or place. Other famous sites include the  Roman Forum ,  Angkor Wat ,  Machu Picchu , and  Great Zimbabwe . In many countries,  government s and other groups of people protect important sites so that they will not be destroyed and so that visitors can always come and see them.

Sometimes archaeological sites are found when foundations are dug for new  building s. Archaeologists have to work quickly when this happens, because people who are building often don't have a lot of time. Many times as soon as the archaeologists are done with their work, the remains that they have found will be covered over, unless they are very important.

 Related pages 
 Civilization 

  Other websites  
   http://en.citizendium.org/wiki/Archaeology Archaeology  -Citizendium

 Category:Archaeology   
