Angel

otheruses 
 globalise date December 2014 
 File:Bernhard Plockhorst - Schutzengel.jpg thumb|right|225|An angel watching over two children. 
 File:Angelsatmamre-trinity-rublev-1410.jpg thumb|right|225px|Three angels, in a picture made in about 1420 by the Russian, Andrej Rublev. 

In many mythologies and  religion s, an  angel  is a good  spirit . The word angel comes from the Greek word  angelos  which means "messenger". Angels appear frequently in the  Old Testament , the  New Testament ,  Qur'an  and  Aqdas .

 In the Bible 
Angels are powerful, smart spirits that obey God's commands and praise him with singing and they have  male  ( masculine ) gender , but without any sex. ref bibleverse Matthew 26:53 ref  They sometimes appear to  human s in human form. ref bibleverse Hebrews 13:2 ref  They can deliver messages to people in person or in  dream s. ref bibleverse Matthew 1:20 ref  Angels that are named in the  Bible  are  Michael (archangel) Michael  (called a "chief prince" ref bibleverse Daniel 10 ref ),  Gabriel  (known for telling  Mary (mother of Jesus) Mary  that she would be the mother of  Jesus ref bibleverse Luke 1:26-38 ref ), and Raphael (in the  Apocrypha l  Book of Tobit ). ref name ABF cite book title The Amazing Bible Factbook year 2008 publisher American Bible Society location New York isbn 1603207783 pages 4-7, 179 ref   The  Ethiopia n  Book of Enoch  also lists four Archangels which watch over the four quadrants of heaven; Michael, Raphael, Gabriel and Uriel. Lucifer is also known as an angel in the Bible.

 Types 
 Cherubim  (plural of cherub) are described as "winged creatures" which have four wings ref bibleverse Ezekiel 1:6 ref  Cherubim guard the  Garden of Eden Eden  with a  sword  of fire. ref bibleverse Genesis 3:24 ref  This suggests that the author of Genesis was aware of different types of angels. Genesis 3:24 is found in the  Book of Ezekiel . A Cherub is mentioned in Ezekiel 28:13-14, saying that the angel was in the Garden of God. ref The IVP New Bible Commentary pp734 states: ' the exact significance of the cherub is unclear' ref 

Ezekiel 28:13-14
13. Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in the day that thou wast created.
14. Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.

It describes the sound of their wings, "like the roar of rushing waters." ref bibleverse Ezekiel 1:24 ref 

Ezekiel 10:5-7 ; Ezekiel 10:8 reveals that they have hands like a man under their wings .

Ezekiel 1:7 KJV reveals that they look like man but are different because they have "straight feet" and four wings and four faces.

Ezekiel ch 1, and 10 describe the cherubim creatures ascending and descending from the earth with wheels. Ezekiel 1:14-20 ; Ezekiel 10:16

Ezekiel 10:9-13 describes what the wheels appeared to look like, and how they moved around, how they moved or flew through the sky quickly but turned not as they went; and how the inside workings of the wheels appeared to be "a wheel in the midst of a wheel" and that the color of the wheels was the color of "Amber" Stone. There are four separate wheels in both accounts, one for each single cherub which is there.

 Seraphim  (plural of seraph, which means "burning")they also are depicted having wings, six of them. They are known for singing and praising God. They can shout so loud, they shake the  temple . ref bibleverse Isaiah 6:4 ref 
 Archangels  like Gabriel ( Gospel of Luke  1:19) are the highest type of angel. They are considered  saint s in the  Catholic church . ref name ABF  However, in the King James Version of the Bible; they are another type of angel. In the  Book of Revelation  the Angel Michael casts the 'great dragon'  Satan  out of heaven and down to earth in a great battle between the good and bad angels, just before the Great Judgement of angels and man. (Revelation 12)
 The  Leviathan  in  Book of Job  41:19-21 has flame that goes:  'out of his mouth' like a  dragon .  Isaiah 30:6 also talks of a 'fiery flying serpent'. Compare Revelation 20:2: , where an angel: 'laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the  Devil , and Satan, and bound him a thousand years'.

 In art 
They are often shown in art as having wings and a  halo . The wings represent their speed, and the halo represents their holiness.

The cherubim in art always appear as baby faced angels with very small non useful wings.

The cherubim statue or  bronze  casting of cherubim in the Temple of  Solomon  depicted them as two four winged creatures whose wings touched at the peak of the ark that they were making.

The same cherubim creatures were said to be cast in gold on top of the  Ark of the Covenant . Casting metal is one of the oldest forms of artwork, and was attempted by  Leonardo Da Vinci .

 Angelology 
The study of Angels is called Angelology. ref http://www.theology.edu/theology/angel.htm Angelology ref 

  References  
 reflist 2 

 Other websites 
 Commonscat-inline Angels 

 Category:Angels  