River Thames

File:Thames map.png thumb|right|300px|Map of the River Thames 

The  River Thames  is a large  river  in  England . It goes through  London  the  capital city  of the  United Kingdom .

The Thames is 346  kilometre s (215  statute mile s) long. Its  Source (river or stream) source  is near the village of Kemble in the  Cotswolds ; it flows through  Oxford  (where it is called "Isis", a shortening of its  Latin  name),  Reading, England Reading ,  Maidenhead ,  Eton, Berkshire Eton  and then  Windsor, England Windsor . 

From the outskirts of  Greater London , it passes  Syon House ,  Hampton Court Palace ,  Richmond-upon-Thames Richmond  (with the famous view of the Thames from Richmond Hill), and  Kew . Then it passes through London, then  Greenwich  and  Dartford  before it enters the sea in an  estuary ,  The Nore . Part of the area west of London is sometimes called the  Thames Valley . The area east of  Tower Bridge  is called  Thames Gateway  by  development agencies and officials.

About 90 kilometres from the sea, above London, the river begins to show the  tide  caused by the  North Sea . It is said that London was made capital of  Roman Britain  at the spot where the tides reached in 43  AD , but different things have pushed this spot farther up the river in the over 2000 years since then. At London, the water is slightly  brackish water salty  with sea salt.

  History  
Like the  Celts  who lived in the area, the Romans called the river  Thamesis .
The Thames was an important way to go between London and Westminster in the 16th and 17th centuries. The  guild  of watermen took Londoners back and forth by  ferry . One of them, John Taylor, the Water Poet (1580--1653), described the river in a poem.

In the 17th and 18th century, at a time some call the " Little Ice Age ", the Thames often froze over in the winter. This led to the first "Frost Fair" in 1607, with a tent city set up on the river with lots of odd amusements, like ice bowling. The last time the river froze over was in 1814. The building of a new  London Bridge  in 1825 may have helped stop it from freezing: the new bridge had fewer pillars than the old, allowing the river to flow more easily, and stopping it from flowing slowly enough to freeze in cold winters.

By the 18th century, the Thames was one of the world's busiest waterways, as London became the centre of the very big  British Empire . During this time one of the worst river disasters in England took place on 3 September 1878 on the Thames, when the crowded pleasure boat  Princess Alice  crashed into the  Bywell Castle  killing over 640 people.

In the ' Great Stink ' of 1858,  pollution  in the river became so bad that the  British House of Commons House of Commons  at Westminster had to quit sitting. There was then a big attempt to hold the city's  sewage  by building huge  sewers  on the north and south river banks, led by  engineer   Joseph Bazalgette .

The coming of  rail transport  and  road transport , and the decline of the Empire in the years following 1914, have made the river less important than it was. London itself is no longer used much as a port, and the "Port of London" has moved down the river to  Tilbury . The Thames has been greatly cleaned up, and life has returned to its dead waters.

In the early 1980s, the  Thames Barrier  was opened to control flooding. It is used many times a year to stop water damage to London's low lying areas up the river.

There are many  bridge s and  tunnel s crossing the Thames, including  Tower Bridge ,  London Bridge ,  Lambeth Bridge , and the  Dartford Crossing .

In September 2011 a  British   comedian ,  David Walliams , swam the entire 140 mile length of the river raising over PS1million for a  Charitable organization charity  called  Sport Relief . ref BBC News -  http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-14878646 David Walliams relieved after 140-mile Thames charity swim ref ref cite news url http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/8756936/David-Walliams-swim-raises-1million.html title David Walliams swim raises PS1million date 12 September 2011 newspaper The Telegraph publisher Telegraph Media Group Limited ref  On  Red Nose Day , people swim the Thames for charity.

  The Thames in literature  
Many books have been written about the Thames.  Three Men in a Boat  by  Jerome K. Jerome  describes a boat trip up the Thames. Somewhere near Oxford is where the Liddells were rowing in the poem at the start of  Alice's Adventures in Wonderland . Somewhere near here was where Alice fell asleep in the book. The river is named in both  The Wind in the Willows  and the play  Toad of Toad Hall .  Heart of Darkness  Marlow tells his tale while waiting for the tide near the mouth of the Thames.

In books set in London you will find  Sherlock Holmes  looking for a boat in  A Study in Scarlet . Bill Sykes kills Nancy just near the river, in  Charles Dickens's  classic novel    Oliver Twist .

  Crossings of the Thames  
See  Crossings of the River Thames  for a full article. Famous crossings include

   Dartford Crossing 
   Thames Barrier 
   Blackwall Tunnel 
   Rotherhithe Tunnel 
   Thames Tunnel 
   Tower Bridge 
   London Bridge 
   Millennium Bridge 
   Hungerford Bridge 
   Westminster Bridge 

  Islands in the Thames  
Listed in upstream order.
   Canvey Island 
   Isle of Grain 
   Frog Island ,  Rainham, London, England Rainham 
   Isle of Dogs 
   Chiswick Eyot 
   Oliver's Island ,  Kew 
   Brentford Ait 
   Lot's Ait 
   Isleworth Ait 
   Corporation Island ,  Twickenham 
   Glover's Island , Twickenham
   Eel Pie Island , Twickenham
   Trowlock Island ,  Teddington 
   Steven's Eyot 
   Raven's Ait ,  Surbiton 
   Boyle Farm Island 
   Thames Ditton Island 
   Ash Island ,  Hampton Court 
   Tagg's Island , Hampton Court
   Garrick's Ait ,  Hampton 
   Platt's Eyot , Hampton
   Sunbury Court Island ,  Sunbury 
   Swan's Rest Island , Sunbury
   Rivermead Island , Sunbury
   Sunbury Lock Ait ' 
   Wheatley's Ait 
   Desborough Island ,  Shepperton 
   D'Oyly Carte Island 
   Lock Island 
   Hamhaugh Island 
   Pharaoh's Island 
   Penton Hook Island 
   Truss's Island 
   Church Island ,  Staines 
   Hollyhock Island , Staines
   Holm Island , Staines
   The Island ,  Hythe End 
   Magna Carta Island ,  Runnymede 
   Pats Croft Eyot 
   White Lily Island 
   Katie-Jo's island 
   Isle of The Great Crostini 
   Poodle island 
   Caspars island 
   Mather Island 
   Kat Isle 
   Scuttle Island 
   Davage Ait 

  Images  
 gallery 
File:ThamesMarker.JPG|The stone under the tree marks the official source of the river Thames
File:Cliveden Deep, River Thames-geograph-4187272.jpg|Thames at Cliveden
File:The River Thames, Reading - geograph.org.uk - 579623.jpg|Thames at Reading
File:River Thames, London-11Sept2009.jpg|Thames in London
File:Gallions Reach (eastern end), Thames Estuary - geograph.org.uk - 37410.jpg|Thames estuary at Gallions Reach
 gallery 

 References 
 reflist 

 DEFAULTSORT:Thames, River 
 Category:River Thames  