History

History  is the  study  of past events. People know what happened in the past by looking at  wikt:thing things   from  the past, including records (like  book s,  newspaper s and  letter s) and  Artifact (archaeology) artifacts  (like  pottery ,  tool s, and human or animal remains).  Library Libraries ,  archive s and  museum s collect and keep these things for people to study history. A person who studies history is called a  historian . A person who studies  pre-history  and history through things left behind by ancient cultures is called an  archaeologist . A person who studies  mankind  and  society  is called an  anthropologist . The study of the sources and methods  used to study and write  history is called  historiography .

People can learn about the past by talking to people who remember things that happened in the past. This is called  oral history . When people who had been  slavery slaves  and  American Civil War   survivor s got old, some historians recorded everything that they said, so that history would not be lost. 

In old times people in different parts of the world kept separate histories because they did not meet each other very often. Some groups of people never met each other.  Medieval   Europe ,  Ancient Rome  and  Ancient China  each thought that they ruled the only important parts of the world and that other parts were " barbarian ".

  Timeline of history  
 Pre-history 
   Ancient history 
   Sumer 
   Ancient Egypt 
   Babylonia 
 Ancient Armenia 
   Ancient Greece 
   Ancient India 
   Ancient China  and  Japan ,  Korea ,  Mongolia 
   Ancient Southeast Asia  -  Cambodia  -  Thailand  -  Indonesia 
   Ancient North America  -  Iroquois ,  Mohawk ,  Huron ,  Haida ,  Lenape ,  Mohican ,  Cree ,  Sioux ,  Inuit ,  Dene 
   Ancient Central America  -  Aztecs ,  Maya ,  Olmecs ,  Toltecs ,  Teotihuacan ,  Mixtecs 
   Ancient South America  -  Inca ,  Chimu ,  Tihuanacu ,  Huari 
   Ancient Africa 
   Ancient Australia 
   Roman Empire 
   Christian Rome  -  Justinian  to the rise of  Byzantium 
   Chinese Dynasties 
   Byzantine Empire 
   Early Islamic Caliphate  -  Muhammad  to  The Crusades 
   Early Middle Ages  - end of European Dark Ages to rise of  Roman Catholic Church 
   High Middle Ages  and  the Crusades  - conflict with  Islam ,  Cathar s,  pagan  tribes in  Lithuania , etc.
   Late Middle Ages  -  13th century  to  15th century 
   Late Islamic Caliphate  - to fall of  Muslim Spain 
   Mongol Empire 
   Renaissance  - 15th century renewal of  science  etc., based on texts from Ancient Greece and Roman Empire that were preserved by Muslims and captured by Christians
   European colonization of the Americas  - 15th century impact on America
 Spanish Empire 
 British Empire 
   Baroque era  - mid  16th century  to mid-late  18th century 
  Conflict of  Ottoman Empire  with  Austria-Hungary 
  Rise of the  Qing Dynasty  in China
   Age of Enlightenment Enlightenment  - mid  17th century  to late  18th century 
   19th century 
 British Empire 
   20th century 
 History of Australia  since colonizing  Australia 
 History of the United States  
   Modern History  and origins of modern  world power structure 
   World War I 
   World War II 
   United Nations ascendance  - how it became so central.
   Chinese Revolution ,  Partition of India ,  North Atlantic Treaty Organisation  (NATO)
  US-Soviet  Cold War  including  Korean War ,  Vietnam War ,  Soviet-Afghan War 
   Recent conflicts in the Muslim World  -  Arab-Israeli Wars ,  UN-Iraq War ,  US invasion of Afghanistan ,  US invasion of Iraq 
   Recent conflicts in West Africa  -  Uganda ,  Chad ,  Rwanda ,  Republic of the Congo Congo ,  Liberia ,  Ivory Coast , and so on

 Current events ,  modern economic history ,  modern social history  and  modern intellectual history  take very different views of the way history has affected the way that we think today.

  Related pages  
 commonscat 
   List of historians 
   World History 
 Political economy 

 wikt 
 Link FA vo 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:History   
 Link GA lt 

 as:bur'nyjii 
 be-x-old:Gistoryia