Prison

more sources date October 2013 
 File:Presidio-modelo2.JPG thumb|224x224px|Inside view of  Presidio modelo , a prison on an  island , in  Cuba 
 File:Haftzelle.JPG thumb|The prison at a police station in Germany 
A  prison  (also called a  jail  or  gaol ) is a  building  where convicted criminals are held and incarcerated. Some prisoners are serving long terms or life sentence while some are waiting for trial. Those with short terms are probably locked up in a jail rather than prison. 

Prisons are run by the government. Other words for prison include "penitentiary", "jail" or "gaol" (pronounced like "jail"), and "correctional facility".  Some prisons or jails are called satellite camp, normal prison, special prison for death rows and maximum security prison.  Inmates are forced to wear prison  uniform  with different bright colours from orange, blue, green and more depend on the prison.  For instance, some prisoners who are prison workers might wear orange, or some prisoners with bad criminal records wear red uniform or vice versa.

A person who has been charged with a  crime , but has not yet been  conviction convicted  for it in a  court , may be sent to prison if:
  the police have arrested the person and are deciding whether to send them to court, 
  the court thinks that the person may not come to their  trial , 
  the court thinks that the person may be a danger to the community, or
  the court has asked for  bail  but the person cannot pay the amount.

People held in prisons are called inmates or  prisoner s.  Those who have been  Sentence (law) sentenced  to prison because of a crime are also called  convict s. 

People who have been  sentenced to death  are also kept in prison until their  execution .

In some countries, prisons are also used for political prisoners (people who disagree with the country's leader or government). In times of  war ,  prisoners of war  may also be held in prisons.

  Prison buildings and facilities  
 File:Presidio Modelo.JPG thumb|224x224px|Presidio modelo, from outside 
Male and female inmates are usually kept in separate locations or in separate prisons. Prisons are usually surrounded by  wall s and  gate s. There are usually many locked gates inside the prison to control the inmates.

The inmates sleep in small locked rooms called cells. Cells have a  bunk bed , a  toilet , and a  sink . Inmates are allowed to leave their cell every day for  exercise . Some inmates work in the prison during the day, either in a  factory  or doing cooking or cleaning.  Law enforcement  officers called prison  guard s watch the inmates. The manager of a prison is called the  warden .

Prisons usually also include other buildings and facilities, such as a  chapel , a library, an exercise yard, a  gymnasium , an infirmary (small  hospital ), visiting rooms (for visits from family and  lawyer s), kitchens, and accommodation for prison staff.

The  United Nations  made the "Standard Minimum Rule" for human treatment for prisoners in 1955. ref http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/treatmentprisoners.htm Standard Minimum Rule for the Treatment of Prisoners ref  Also the Article 10 of  International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights  also affirm the treatment with humanity for them in prison.

  Prisons for young people  
There are special prisons for people under the age of 18 who commit crimes. These inmates are called young offenders or  broken wikt link juvenile juvenile  offenders.

  Controversy  
Prisons are a  controversy controversial  topic that people have different  debate views  about.

 People who think that we should have prisons say that removing people who commit crimes from society prevents them from committing more crimes and punishes them for their behavior. They also say that putting people in prison may also prevent others who are likely to commit similar crimes from committing them.

 People who think that we should not put people in prisons say that being put in prison makes people more violent and angry. People who commit minor crimes that are sent to prison meet violent criminals. As well, when people are sent to prison, they cannot see their  family  or children, which can cause problems for their family. Sometimes people are put in prison who have done nothing wrong. An American theory that is critical of prisons is called the prison industrial complex. People who believe in the prison industrial complex think that private prison companies want lots of people to be put in prison in order to make money.

  Number of people in prison  
As of 2006, there are currently nine million people in prison in the world. The United States currently has the most people in prison; it has more than 2 million people in prison. In 2002, both Russia and China also had over 1 million people in prison. In 2003, the United Kingdom had 73,000 people in prison; France and Germany had a similar number of people in prison.

  Famous prisons in history  

 Alcatraz , San Francisco (historical) 
 Attica Correctional Facility , Attica, New York, scene of the most infamous prison riot in United States history 
 The  Bastille , Paris, France (historical) In French 
 Devil's Island  French Guiana  (historical) 
 Leavenworth, Kansas, site of a federal prison and the military's primary prison, the United States Disciplinary Barracks. 
 Rikers Island, New York City, US (since 1884) 
 Sing Sing Correctional Facility, Ossining, New York, U.S. (since 1828) 
 The  Tower of London , London, England (historical)

  Cultural references to prisons and prison life  
There are many books and poems about prisons or prison life, such as  The Count of Monte Cristo  by Alexandre Dumas, pere and  The Ballad of Reading Gaol  by  Oscar Wilde .

There are also movies that depict prison life, including:
 A Clockwork Orange  (1971) directed by  Stanley Kubrick 
 Papillon (movie) Papillon  (1973) directed by Franklin J Schaffner
 Stir Crazy  (1975) directed by  Sidney Poitier  
 Midnight Express  (1978) directed by  Alan Parker  
 Escape from Alcatraz  (1979) directed by  Don Siegel  
 The Shawshank Redemption  (1994) directed by  Frank Darabont  
 Dead Man Walking  (1995) directed by  Tim Robbins  
 The Green Mile  (1999) directed by Frank Darabont 
 Lockdown (film) Lockdown  (2000) directed by  John Luessenhop 

There have also been television programs, such as  Prisoner: Cell Block H  (1979-1986),  Prison Break  (2005-2009),  Lockup  (2005 - present) and  Lockdown: Americas Hardest Prisons  (2006 - present). A current TV show about a women's prison is  Orange Is the New Black .

  Related pages  
 County jail  is a term used for local administrative security prisons that are in each county of the United States and for those awaiting trial as well those serving short sentences. Some of these institutions can also hold sentenced maximum security immates and some who are awaiting transport to state prisons if they're convicted of crimes.
 List of U.S. state prisons state prisons  is a term used for prisons that are in each state of the United States and for criminals convicted of crimes that land them in these institutions.
 federal prison  is a term for special prisons that are in each state of the United States, run by the  Federal Bureau Of Prisons  and for criminals who committed  federal crimes  that land them in these institutuions.
   List of U.S. military prisons military prisons  is a term for special prisons that are in each state of the United States, run by the  miltary  and for criminals who are convicted of  war crimes  that land them in these institutions.

  References  
 references 
 Michel Foucault ,  Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison , New York: Random House 1975.

 Category:Prisons   
 Category:Basic English 850 words