Chinese language

Infobox language
 name Chinese
 image  Hanyu_trad_simp.svg
 imagecaption  Hanyu ( Chinese ) written in  Chinese character Hanzi 
 imagesize 
 nativename   lang zh Yi Yu /Han Yu  ,  lang zh Hua Yu /Hua Yu   or  lang zh Zhong Wen  br Hanyu, Huayu, or Zhongwen
 ethnicity 
 states China People's Republic of China  (PRC, commonly known as China),  Taiwan Republic of China  (ROC, commonly known as Taiwan),  Singapore ,  Malaysia ,  Brunei , the  United States ,  Canada , the  Philippines ,  Australia ,  Thailand ,  Vietnam ,  Indonesia ,  Mauritius ,  Peru , and other places with Chinese communities
 region  
 speakers 1.2 billion 
 date 1984-2000
 ref ref Ethnologue16 zho ref 
 familycolor Sino-Tibetan
 fam2 Sinitic languages Sinitic 
 stand1 Standard Chinese Mandarin 
 dia6 Gan Chinese Jiangxinese 
 dia7 Hakka language Hakka 
 dia5 Xiang Chinese Hunanese 
 dia2 Jinyu Chinese Jin 
 dia1 Mandarin Chinese Mandarin 
 dia4 Wu Chinese Wu  (including Shanghainese)
 dia3 Huizhou Chinese Huizhou 
 dia8 Yue Chinese Yue  (including Cantonese-Taishanese)
 dia9 Ping Chinese Pinghua 
 dia10 Shaojiang Min Shaojiang 
 dia11 Min Bei Northern Min 
 dia12 Min Dong Eastern Min  (including Fuchow)
 dia13 Min Zhong Central Min 
 dia14 Puxian Min Pu Xian 
 dia15 Min Nan Southern Min  (including Amoy, Taiwanese)
 dia16 Teochew dialect Teochew  (including Swatow, Chaozhou, Jieyang, parts of Shanwei/Meizhou)
 script Chinese character s,  zhuyin fuhao ,  pinyin ,  Xiao'erjing 
 nation UNO United Nations br 
 PRC People's Republic of China 

 ROC-TW Republic of China br 
 SGP Singapore   (one of four official languages) br 
 flagicon image Flag of Wa.svg size 22px   Wa State   (alongside the  Wa language ) br 
 flag Brunei 
 minority    flag United States  (minority and auxiliary) br flag Malaysia  (minority and auxiliary) br flag Philippines  (minority and auxiliary)
 agency In the PRC: National Commission on Language and Script Work ref http://www.china-language.gov.cn/ china-language.gov.cn   zh icon ref br In the ROC:  National Languages Committee br In Singapore:  Promote Mandarin Council / Speak Mandarin Campaign ref cite web  url http://www.mandarin.org.sg/   title Speak Mandarin Campaign  accessdate 2011-08-09 ref 
 iso1 zh iso2b chi iso2t zho
 iso3 zho lingua 79-AAA
 lc1 cdo ld1 Min Dong 
 lc2 cjy ld2 Jin Chinese Jinyu 
 lc3 cmn ld3 Mandarin Chinese Mandarin 
 lc4 cpx ld4 Pu Xian 
 lc5 czh ld5 Huizhou Chinese Huizhou 
 lc6 czo ld6 Min Zhong 
 lc7 gan ld7 Gan Chinese Gan 
 lc8 hak ld8 Hakka language Hakka 
 lc9 hsn ld9 Xiang Chinese Xiang 
 lc10 mnp ld10 Min Bei 
 lc11 nan ld11 Min Nan 
 lc12 wuu ld12 Wu Chinese Wu 
 lc13 yue ld13 Yue Chinese Yue 
 lc14 och ld14 Old Chinese 
 lc15 ltc ld15 Middle Chinese Late Middle Chinese 
 lc16 lzh ld16 Classical Chinese 
 map New-Map-Sinophone World.PNG
 mapcaption Map of the  Chinese Language Sinophone  world. br 
 Information: 
 legend #0E0069 Countries identified Chinese as a primary, administrative, or native language 
 legend #7FABAB Countries with more than 5,000,000 Chinese speakers 
 legend #9fceff Countries with more than 1,000,000 Chinese speakers 
 legend #D5E8FF Countries with more than 500,000 Chinese speakers 
 legend #F7D5FF Countries with more than 100,000 Chinese speakers 
 legend #0080ff Major Chinese speaking settlements 
 
 ChineseText 
 Infobox Chinese title Chinese languages (Spoken) l Han Chinese Han  language t wikt:Han Yu  Han Yu  s wikt:Yi Yu  Yi Yu  p Hanyu w Han4-yu3 mi xan y myr Han-yu tp Han-yu h Hon Ngi j Hon3 jyu5 buc Hang-ngu poj Han-gi, Han-gu wuu hoe3 nyiu2 
 Infobox Chinese title Chinese language (Written) c wikt:Zhong Wen  Zhong Wen  h Chung-Vun p Zhongwen w Chung1-wen2 mi tsUNG u@n myr jung-wen tp jhong-wun buc Dung-ung poj Tiong-bun wuu tson1 ven1 j Zung1 man4*2 l Chinese  text (literary theory) text 

The  Chinese language  is the group of languages used by Chinese in  China  and elsewhere. It forms part of a language family called the  Sino-Tibetan languages Sino-Tibetan family of languages . 

Chinese includes many regional language varieties, the main ones being  Mandarin Chinese Mandarin ,  Wu Chinese Wu ,  Yue Chinese Yue , and  Min Chinese Min . These are not  Mutual intelligibility mutually intelligible , ref This means a speaker from one region cannot understand a speaker from another region, unless they have also learnt that language. ref  and many of the regional varieties are themselves a number of non-mutually-intelligible subvarieties.  Jerry Norman estimated that there are hundreds of mutually unintelligible varieties of Chinese. ref Norman J. 2003. The Chinese dialects: phonology. In Thurgood, Graham & LaPolla, Randy J. (eds)  The Sino-Tibetan languages . Routledge, pp. 72-83. ISBN 978-0-7007-1129-1 ref  As a result, many linguists refer to these varieties as separate languages. ref DeFrancis, John 1984. The Chinese language: fact and fantasy. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0-8248-1068-9 ref  

'Chinese' can refer to the written or the spoken languages. Although there are many spoken Chinese languages, they use only one writing system for the language. ref As do European languages, which all use an alphabetic script. ref  Differences in speaking are reflected in differences in writing. Official China adopts a similar policy to the one in the  Soviet Union . All official documents are written in  Mandarin , and Mandarin is taught all over China. They have one standard language for all of the schools in China and  Taiwan . It is also a standard for language teaching in some other countries. In English we call it  Mandarin language Mandarin . In China they call it " Putonghua " or "common to everybody speech." In Taiwan they call it " Guoyu " or "language of the whole country". They need a standard language because otherwise many people would not understand each other, despite being in the same country .

Chinese is used by the  Han people  in China and other ethnic groups who have come into China and are declared Chinese by the Chinese government. Chinese is almost always written in  Chinese character s. They are symbols that have meaning, called  logogram s. They also give  some  indication of pronunciation. But just as "Xavier" sounds very different in English (ex-aye-vee-er), French (za-vee-aye), and Spanish (khah-veer), the same character can get very different pronunciations among the different kinds of Chinese.  Since Chinese characters have been around for at least 3500 years, people in places far from each other say them differently, just as "1, 2, 3" can be read differently in different languages.

Chinese people needed to write down pronunciations in dictionaries. Chinese does not have an alphabet, so how to write down sounds was a big problem in the beginning. Nowadays the Mandarin language uses  Hanyu Pinyin Hanyu pinyin  to represent the sounds in  Roman letter s.

All the Chinese languages (or  dialect s) use  tonal language tones . This means that they use high and low pitches to help make differences in meaning clear.

  Different languages or dialects of Chinese  
The Chinese language is like a big tree. The base of the tree started thousands of years ago. It now has several main limbs. Some people call "just a branch" what other people call a main limb, so you can say there are six or seven main limbs. Each of these main limbs splits off into branches about the way there are branches of English spoken in Great Britain, the United States, Australia, India, and so forth. Line the Chinese limbs up by number of speakers and we get: Mandarin, the language spoken in an area centering on Shanghai, the language spoken in Guangdong province (Cantonese), the language spoken mostly in Fujian province (but also by many speakers in Taiwan), the language spoken mostly in Hunan province, a language that is historically that of a refugee group and so not so closely concentrated in any one area in south-east China (it is called "Hakka" or "guest family" speech), and a language spoken in an area that centers on Jiangxi province. Just as the  Romance languages  all come from the area around Rome and are based on Latin, the Chinese languages all have some common source, so they keep many common things among them.

 File:Origin of Chinese Languages rev.svg 350px|thumb|Branches in modern times are only shown for "Guan" (Language of the officials. Mandarin). 
Here are the main seven main groups of languages/dialects of Chinese by size:

  Guan ("Northern" or Mandarin) Bei Fang Hua /Bei Fang Hua  or Guan Hua /Guan Hua , (about 850 million speakers), 
  Wu Wu /Wu , which includes Shanghainese, (about 90 million speakers), 
  Yue ( Cantonese language Cantonese ) Yue /Yue , (about 80 million speakers), 
  Min ( Hokkien , which includes Taiwanese) Min /Min , (about 50 million speakers), 
  Xiang Xiang , (about 35 million speakers), 
   Hakka (language) Hakka  Ke Jia  or Ke , (about 35 million speakers), 
  Gan Gan /Gan , (about 20 million speakers)

  Traditional and simplified characters  

In 1956, the government of the People's Republic of China made public a set of  simplified Chinese characters  to make learning, reading and writing the Chinese language easier. In Mainland China and  Singapore , people use these simpler characters. In  Hong Kong ,  Taiwan , and other places where they speak Chinese, people still use the more  Traditional Chinese characters traditional characters . The  Korean language  also uses Chinese characters to represent certain words. The  Japanese language  uses them even more often. These characters are known in Korean as  Hanja  and in Japanese as  Kanji . 

A Chinese person with a good education today knows 6,000-7,000 characters. About 3,000 Chinese characters are needed to read a Mainland newspaper. However, people who have learned only the 400 most frequently used characters can read a newspaper--but they will have to guess some less-used words.

  Examples  

Here are some samples of some words and sentences in  Mandarin Chinese . Simplified Characters are on the left, and Traditional characters are on the right. The pronunciation is given in the  pinyin  system, which may not always be as simple as it looks for those who have not studied it.

The Traditional Characters are now used in Hong Kong and Taiwan. Chinese from Mainland China uses the Simplified Characters, but may recognize Traditional Characters.

Before 1956, Chinese was written using only Traditional Characters. At that time most Chinese people could not read or write at all. The government of the People's Republic of China thought that the Traditional characters were very hard to understand. They also thought that if they made the characters simpler more people could learn how to read and write. Today, many people in China can read and write with the new Simplified Characters.

 class wikitable border 1  Word
  Pinyin
  Simplified
  Traditional
  How are you?   Ni hao ma?   Ni Hao Ma ?   Ni Hao Ma ?
  What is your name?   Ni jiao shenme mingzi?   Ni Jiao Shi Yao Ming Zi ?   Ni Jiao Shi Mo Ming Zi ?
   United States America    Meiguo   Mei Guo    Mei Guo 
   France    Faguo   Fa Guo    Fa Guo 
   Britain    Yingguo   Ying Guo    Ying Guo 
   Germany    Deguo   De Guo    De Guo 
   Russia    Eguo   E Guo    E Guo 
   Thailand   Taiguo   Tai Guo    Tai Guo 
   Poland    Bolan   Bo Lan    Bo Lan 
   Japan    Riben   Ri Ben    Ri Ben 
   Pakistan    Bajisitan   Ba Ji Si Tan    Ba Ji Si Tan 
 

 Related pages 
   Standard Chinese (language) 
   Mandarin language 
   Cantonese language 

 References 
 reflist 

  Other websites  
   http://www.chinese-course.com Chinese Flashcard Website  Learn Chinese Online
   http://www.hellomandarin.com I Love Chinese  Learning Chinese Magazine
   http://www.learnmandarinonline.org Learn Chinese  Free Chinese Learning Lessons and mp3
   http://tools.google.com/pinyin/ Free Chinese Character Input Software  Google Pinyin Input Software
   http://www.hellomandarin.net Chinese Pinyin  a brief introduction to standard Chinese phonetic system
   http://www.daydayupchinese.com Day Day Up Chinese  Online Chinese textbook
   http://www.china-learn.info/Hanyu/Learn_Chinese.html Direct method of learning Chinese --no English translation. A wok is just a wok.
   http://studymorechinese.com/ Study More Chinese  social network for Mandarin learners with videos, blogs, forum.
   http://www.ichineselearning.com/ iChineseLearning  A site for learning Chinese through skype Chinese lessons.

 Official UN languages 

 Category:Chinese language   
 Category:Tonal languages