Cologne

Infobox German Location
 Name   Cologne
 German_name   Koln
 Art   City
 image_photo   Koeln Hohenzollernbruecke.jpg
 image_caption    Cologne Cathedral  with  Hohenzollernbrucke Hohenzollern Bridge 
 Wappen  DEU Koeln COA.svg
 
 lat_deg   50  lat_min   57
 lon_deg   06  lon_min   58
 Bundesland   Nordrhein-Westfalen
 Regierungsbezirk    Cologne Government Region Cologne 
 Kreis   Urban district
 Hohe   37
 Flache   405.15
 Einwohner   1.060.582
 Stand   2015-12-31
 PLZ   50441-51149
 PLZ-alt   5000
 Vorwahl   0221
 Kfz   K
 Gemeindeschlussel   05 3 15 000
 LOCODE   DE CGN
 Burgermeister   J. Roters
 Partei   SPD
 Website    http://www.stadt-koeln.de/ www.stadt-koeln.de 
 year   50
 
 Cologne  ( lang-de Koln  or sometimes  Kolle ) is a city on the  Rhine River  in the  States of Germany state  of North Rhine-Westphalia in  Germany . About 1,060,000 people live there.

The city was founded by the  Roman Empire Romans  in the year 50. Before that, it was a Roman castle (" castellum ") and a town inhabited by a local German  tribe  named  Ubier  at least for 100 years. Archaeologists have found out that the surrounding area was populated already during the stone age.

The most interesting thing to see there is  Cologne Cathedral . This  church  was built from about 1248 to about 1550, but completed only in 1880. The  United Nations  list it as 'World Cultural Heritage'. Cologne's archbishop  Rainald von Dassel  brought the  relic s of the biblical  Biblical Magi Three Wise Men  there in 1164. They are kept in a very beautiful  Shrine of the Three Kings at Cologne Cathedral golden shrine  in the cathedral. Three golden crowns in the coat of arms of the city symbolize them. They made Cologne a major place of  pilgrimage .

Traditionally, the city was always Roman Catholic. That changed only recently after the  Second World War ,as a result of massive immigration of  Protestants  from the  East Germany East of Germany . Still the largest number of people, 41.6%, are Roman Catholic, compared to 17% Protestant. 10% of the people are Muslim.

Cologne is the biggest city in  North Rhine-Westphalia . Cologne is in the southern part of the ' Rhine - Ruhr   agglomeration ' of cities with a combined total population of about 10 million people. This is one of the most densely populated areas of the world.

The  University of Cologne  alone has more than 50,000 students. It was founded 1919 and is one of the biggest universities in  Germany . There are several specialized Schools in addition to the university. The  Hochschule fur Musik  is the biggest Academy of Music in Europe. Cologne has two Colleges of Arts and the Sports College again is one of the biggest institutions of its kind worldwide. Cologne has 31 museums. Cologne has one of the busiest train stations in Europe. It is the only train station located next to a big cathedral.

People in Cologne and nearby have their own dialect. They call it  Kolsch (language) Kolsch . During  Karneval carnival  time it even appears on nationwide broadcasts.

Cologne has a handful of broadcasting stations. The  WDR Westdeutscher Rundfunk , part of the network  ARD , is the biggest producer of television and radio programs in Germany.

Cologne is also famous for  Eau de Cologne  ( Kolnisch Wasser ). ref cite web url http://www.capturedplaces.com/cologne2/originaleaudecolognelogo.php title Eau de Cologne ref 

Cologne has an  oceanic climate  ( Cfb  in the  Koeppen climate classification ).

 Related pages 
   Berlin 
   Bonn  (nearby city)
   Dusseldorf  (nearby city)
   Frankfurt/Main 
   Hamburg 
   Leverkusen  (nearby city)
   Munich 

  References  
 reflist 

  Other websites  
 Commonscat-inline Cologne 
   http://www.koeln.de German page on the city 
   http://www.uni-koeln.de German page of the University 
   http://www.koelner-dom.de German page of the cathedral 
   http://www.wdr.de German page of the broadcasting station  Westdeutscher Rundfunk 


 Hanseatic League 
 Cities in Germany 

 Category:Cities with more than a million inhabitants 
 Category:Cities in North Rhine-Westphalia 
 Category:Cologne  