Tree

File:Arbres.jpg thumb|right|250px|Trees around a lake 
 File:Aspen-PopulusTremuloides-2001-09-27.jpg thumb|220px|The trembling  aspen  in its autumn colours 
 File:Ficus sp. in Guanacaste.jpg thumb|right|200px| Strangler fig  tree in  Costa Rica . Locally known as  Guanacaste 
 File:Ficus watkinsiana on Syzygium hemilampra-Iluka.jpg thumb|200px|...and this shows how the strangler fig grows 

A  tree  is a tall  plant  with a trunk and branches made of  wood . Trees can live for many years. The oldest tree ever discovered is approximately 5,000 years old. The four main parts of a tree are the  root s, the  Trunk (botany) trunk , the  branch es, and the  leaf leaves . 

The roots of a tree are usually under the ground. One case for which this is not true are the roots of the  mangrove  tree which are often under water. ref name nat cite  web url http://www.naturia.per.sg/buloh/plants/mangrove_trees.htm title Mangrove Trees publisher Naturia.per.sg ref  A single tree has many roots. The roots carry food and  water  from the ground through the trunk and branches to the leaves of the tree. They can also breathe in air. ref name nat  Sometimes, roots are specialized into  aerial root s, which can also provide support, as is the case with the  banyan  tree. 

The trunk is the main body of the tree. The trunk is covered with  bark  which protects it from damage. Branches grow from the trunk. They spread out so that the leaves can get more sunlight.

The leaves of a tree are green most of the time, but they can come in many colours, shapes and sizes. The leaves take in sunlight and use water and food from the roots to make the tree grow, and to reproduce.

Trees and  shrub s take in  water  and  carbon dioxide  and give out  oxygen  with sunlight to form  sugar s. This is the opposite of what animals do in respiration. Plants also do some respiration using oxygen the way animals do. They need oxygen as well as carbon dioxide to live.

  Parts of trees  
 File:Leavessnipedale.jpg thumb|right|200px| Beech  leaves 
 File:WisconsinScenery.jpg right|thumb|200px|Tree  root s anchor the structure and provide  water  and  nutrients . The ground has  erosion eroded  away around the roots of this young  pine  tree 
 File:Tree.ring.arp.jpg thumb|right|200px|Growth rings|The dark lines between the centre and the bark are  medullary ray s, which allow nutrients to flow across the tree trunk 

The parts of a tree are the  root s,  trunk (botany) trunk (s),  branch es,  twig s and  leaf leaves . Tree stems are mainly made of support and transport tissues ( xylem  and  phloem ).  Wood  consists of  xylem  cells, and  bark  is made of  phloem  and other tissues external to the vascular cambium. 

  Growth of the trunk  
As a tree grows, it may produce  growth ring s as new wood is laid down around the old wood. In areas with seasonal climate, wood produced at different times of the year may alternate light and dark rings. In temperate climates, and tropical climates with a single wet-dry season alternation, the growth rings are annual, each pair of light and dark rings being one year of growth. In areas with two wet and dry seasons each year, there may be two pairs of light and dark rings each year; and in some (mainly semi-desert regions with irregular rainfall), there may be a new growth ring with each  rainfall . ref name mirov Mirov, N.T. 1967.  The genus Pinus . Ronald Press. ref  

In tropical  rainforest  regions, with constant year-round climate, growth is continuous. Growth rings are not visible and there is no change in the wood texture. In  species  with annual rings, these rings can be counted to find the age of the tree. This way, wood taken from trees in the past can be dated, because the patterns of ring thickness are very distinctive. This is  dendrochronology . Very few tropical trees can be accurately dated in this manner.

  Roots  
The  root s of a tree are generally down in earth, providing  wiky:anchorage anchorage  for the parts above ground, and taking in  water  and  nutrients  from the  soil . Most trees need help from a fungus for better uptake of nutriens: this is  mycorrhiza . Most of a tree's  Biomass (ecology) biomass  comes from carbon dioxide absorbed from the atmosphere (see  photosynthesis ). Above ground, the trunk gives height to the leaf-bearing branches, competing with other plant species for  sunlight . In many trees, the order of the branches makes exposure of the leaves to sunlight better.

  Exceptions  
Not all trees have all the organs or parts as mentioned above. For example, most palm trees are not branched, the  Saguaro saguaro cactus  of North America has no functional leaves,  tree fern s do not produce bark, etc. Based on their general shape and size, all of these are nonetheless generally regarded as trees. Trees can vary very much. A plant form that is similar to a tree, but generally having smaller, multiple trunks and/or branches that arise near the ground, is called a  shrub  (or a bush). Even though that is true, no precise differentiation between shrubs and trees is possible. Given their small size,  bonsai  plants would not technically be 'trees', but one should not confuse reference to the form of a species with the size or shape of individual specimens. A spruce seedling does not fit the definition of a tree, but all spruces are trees.

  Classification  
 File:TicinoTree.jpg thumb|right|200px|A  sweet chestnut  tree in  Ticino ,  Switzerland 

A tree is a plant form that can be found in many different  order (biology) orders  and  family (biology) families  of plants. Trees show many  growth form s, leaf type and shape, bark traits and  Organ (anatomy) organs .

The tree form has changed separately in classes of plants that are not related, in response to similar problems (for the tree). With about 100,000  species types  of trees, the number of tree types in the whole world might be one  wikt:fourth fourth  of all living  plant  types. ref cite web  url http://www.talkbx.com/2008/05/02/scientists-to-capture-tree-dna-worldwide/#more-835   title TreeBOL project  accessdate 2008-07-11 ref  Most tree species grow in  tropical  parts of the world and many of these areas have not been surveyed yet by  botanist s (they study plants), making species difference and ranges not well understood. ref Friis, Ib, and Henrik Balslev. 2005.  Plant diversity and complexity patterns: local, regional, and global dimensions : proceedings of an international symposium held at the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters in Copenhagen, Denmark, 25-28 May 2003.  Biologiske skrifter, 55. Copenhagen: Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters. pp 57-59. ref 

The earliest trees were  tree fern s,  horsetail s and  Clubmoss lycophytes , which grew in  forest s in the  Carboniferous  period; tree ferns still survive, but the only surviving horsetails and lycophytes are not of tree form. Later, in the  Triassic  Period,  Pinophyta conifers ,  ginkgo s,  cycad s and other  gymnosperm s appeared, and subsequently  flowering plant s in the  Cretaceous  period. Most species of trees today are flowering plants ( Angiosperms ) and  conifers .

A small group of trees growing together is called a  grove (nature) grove  or  copse , and a landscape covered by a dense growth of trees is called a  forest . Several  biotope s are defined largely by the trees that inhabit them; examples are  rainforest  and  taiga  (see  ecozone s). A landscape of trees scattered or spaced across grassland (usually grazed or burned over periodically) is called a  savanna . A forest of great age is called  old growth forest  or  ancient woodland  (in the UK). A very young tree is called a sapling.

  Records  
  Height  
The coast  redwood :  convert 115.85 m ft abbr off , in Redwood National Park,  California  is believed to be the world's tallest tree. ref name Sequoia_sempervirens cite web  url http://www.conifers.org/cu/se/index.htm   title Sequoia sempervirens  accessdate 2007-06-10  last   first   authorlink   coauthors   date   year   month   work Gymnosperm Database publisher   pages   language   archiveurl   archivedate ref  

The tallest trees in  Australia  are all  Eucalyptus eucalypts , of which there are more than 700 species. The so-called 'mountain ash'. with a slim, straight trunk, grows to over 300 feet.

  Stoutest trees  
The stoutest living single-trunk species in diameter is the African  baobab :  convert 15.9 m ft abbr on , Glencoe baobab (measured near the ground), Limpopo Province,  South Africa . ref name southafrica cite web url http://www2.dwaf.gov.za/dwaf/download.asp?f=4148___list+of+proposed+Champion+trees.pdf&docId=4148   title List of Champion Trees published for comment, 2005, South African Department of Water Affairs and Forestry  accessdate 2010-01-18 ref  This tree split up in November 2009 and now the stoutest baobab could be Sunland Baobab (South Africa) with diameter 10.64 m and circumference of 33.4 m.

Some trees develop multiple trunks (whether from an individual tree or multiple trees) which grow together. The  sacred fig  is a notable example of this, forming additional 'trunks' by growing adventitious roots down from the branches, which then thicken up when the root reaches the ground to form new trunks; a single sacred fig tree can have hundreds of such trunks.

  Age of trees  
The life-span of trees is determined by growth rings. These can be seen if the tree is cut down or in cores taken from the edge to the center of the tree. Correct determination is only possible for trees which make growth rings, generally those which occur in seasonal climates. Trees in uniform non-seasonal tropical climates are always growing and do not have distinct growth rings. It is also only possible for trees which are solid to the center of the tree; many very old trees become hollow as the dead  Wood#Heartwood and sapwood heartwood  decays away. For some of these species, age estimates have been made on the basis of extrapolating current growth rates, but the results are usually little better than guesses or speculation. White proposed a method of estimating the age of large and veteran trees in the  United Kingdom  by correlation between a tree's stem diameter, growth character and age. ref White J. 1990.  Estimating the age of large and veteran trees in Britain .  Forestry Commission  Edinburgh. ref  

The verified oldest measured ages are:
  Great Basin bristlecone pine (Methuselah)  Pinus longaeva : 4,844 years ref name Gymnosperm_oldest http://www.conifers.org/topics/oldest.htm Gymnosperm Database: How old is that tree? .  Retrieved on 2008-04-17. ref 
  Alerce: 3,622 years ref name Gymnosperm_oldest 
  Giant sequoia: 3,266 years ref name Gymnosperm_oldest 
  Sugi: 3,000 years ref name Suzuki Suzuki E. 1997. The dynamics of old  Cryptomeria japonica  forest on Yakushima Island.  Tropics   6(4) : 421-428.  http://biodiversity.sci.kagoshima-u.ac.jp/suzuki/paper/Suzuki1997.pdf online ref 
  Huon-pine: 2,500 years ref name Gymnosperm_oldest 

Other species suspected of reaching exceptional age include European Yew  Taxus baccata  (probably over 2,000 years ref Harte J. 1996. How old is that old yew?  At the Edge  4: 1-9. Available  http://www.indigogroup.co.uk/edge/oldyews.htm online ref ref Kinmonth F. 2006. Ageing the yew - no core, no curve?  International Dendrology Society Yearbook  2005: 41-46 ISSN 0307-332X ref ) and western redcedar  Thuja plicata . The oldest known European yew is the Llangernyw yew in the Churchyard of Llangernyw village in North  Wales  which is estimated to be between 4,000 and 5,000 years old.

The oldest reported age for an angiosperm tree is 2293 years for the  Sri Maha Bodhi   sacred fig  ( Ficus religiosa ) planted in 288 BC at Anuradhapura,  Sri Lanka ; this is said to be the oldest human-planted tree with a known planting date.

  Tree value estimation  
Studies have shown that trees contribute as much as 27% of the appraised land value in certain markets. ref "Protecting Existing Trees on Building Sites" p.4 published by the City of  Raleigh, North Carolina , March 1989, Reprinted February 2000 ref 
 class wikitable + Basic tree values (varies by region) ref "How Valuable Are Your Trees" by Gary Moll, April, 1985, American Forests Magazine ref 
  diameter br (inches)   value br (1985 US$)
  10   $1,729
  14   $3,388
  18   $5,588
  26   $11,682
  30   $15,554
 

These most likely use diameter measured at breast height (dbh), 4.5 feet (140 cm) above ground--not the larger base diameter. A general model for any year and diameter is: 

 math \text{Value} = 17.27939 \times (\text{diameter})^2 \times 1.022^{\text{year} - 1985} math 

assuming 2.2% inflation per year. ref based on 1985 to 2009, using  NASA   inflation   http://cost.jsc.nasa.gov/inflateGDP.html calculator ref 

  Tree climbing  
 Tree climbing  is an activity where one moves around in the crown of trees. ref citeweb url http://www.treeclimbing.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=category&layout=blog&id=17&Itemid=140 title Benefits of Tree Climbing ref 

 File:Tree climbing.JPG thumb|right|200px|A tree climber 

Use of a  rope ,  helmet , and  safety harness harness  are the minimum requirements to ensure the safety of the climber. Other equipment can also be used depending on the experience and skill of the tree climber. Some tree climbers take special  hammock s called "Treeboats" and Portaledges with them into the tree canopies where they can enjoy a  wikt:picnic picnic  or nap, or spend the night.

Tree climbing is an "on rope" activity that puts together many different tricks and gear originally derived from  rock climbing  and  caving . These techniques are used to climb trees for many purposes, including tree care ( arboriculture arborists ), animal rescue, recreation, sport, research, and activism.

  Damage  
 File:Tasmania logging 08 Mighty tree.jpg thumb|200px| El Grande , about 280 feet high, the most  wikt:massive massive  (though not the tallest)  Eucalyptus regnans  was accidentally killed by loggers burning-off the remains of legally loggable trees (less than 280 ft) that had been felled all around it 

The three big sources of tree damage are  biotic  (from living sources),  abiotic  (from non-living sources) and  deforestation  (cutting trees down). Biotic sources would include insects which might bore into the tree, deer which might rub bark off the trunk, or  fungi , which might attach themselves to the tree. ref Wiseman, P. Eric 2008.  Integrated pest management tactics . Continuing Education Unit,  International Arboricultural Society   17 . ref 

Abiotic sources include  lightning ,  vehicles  impacts, and construction activities. Construction activities can involve a number of damage sources, including grade changes that prevent aeration to roots, spills involving toxic chemicals such as cement or petroleum products, or severing of branches or roots. People can damage trees also.

Both damage sources can result in trees becoming dangerous, and the term "hazard trees" is commonly used by arborists, and industry groups such as power line operators. Hazard trees are trees which due to disease or other factors are more susceptible to falling during windstorms, or having parts of the tree fall. 

The process of finding the danger a tree presents is based on a process called the quantified tree risk assessment. ref Ellison M.J. 2005  Quantified tree risk assessment used in the management of amenity trees.  Arboric . International Society of Arboriculture.  31 :2 57-65 ref 

Trees are similar to people. Both can take a lot of some types of damage and survive, but even small amounts of certain types of trauma can result in death. Arborists are very aware that established trees will not tolerate any appreciable disturbance of the root system. ref Schoeneweiss D.F. Prevention and treatment of construction damage.  Journal of Arborculture   8 :169 ref  Even though that is true, most people and construction professionals do not realize how easily a tree can be killed.

One reason for confusion about tree damage from construction involves the dormancy of trees during winter. Another factor is that trees may not show symptoms of damage until 24 months or longer after damage has occurred. For that reason, persons who do not know about caring for trees may not link the actual cause with the later damaged effect.

Various organizations have long recognized the importance of construction activities that impact tree health. The impacts are important because they can result in monetary losses due to tree damage and resultant remediation or replacement costs, as well as violation of government ordinances or community or subdivision restrictions. 

As a result, protocols (standard ways) for tree management prior to, during and after construction activities are well established, tested and refined (changed). These basic steps are involved:
  Review of the construction plans
  Development of the related tree inventory
  Application of standard construction tree management protocols
  Assessment of potential for expected tree damages
  Development of a tree protection plan (providing for pre-, concurrent, and post construction damage prevention and remediation steps)
  Development of a tree protection plan
  Development of a remediation plan
  Implementation of  tree protection zone s (TPZs)
  Assessment of construction tree damage, post-construction
  Implementation of the remediation plan

  Trees in culture  

The tree has always been a cultural symbol. Common icons are the World tree, for instance Yggdrasil, ref name Mountfort 2003 41 cite book  title Nordic runes: understanding, casting, and interpreting the ancient Viking oracle  last Mountfort  first Paul Rhys  authorlink   coauthors   year 2003  publisher Inner Traditions / Bear & Company  location   isbn 9780892810932  page 41  pages 279  url http://books.google.co.in/books?id=_3B7EmvAqngC   accessdate ref  and the tree of life. The tree is often used to represent nature or the environment itself. A common mistake (wrong thing) is that trees get most of their mass from the ground. ref name TedTalk http://www.ted.com/index.php/talks/jonathan_drori_on_what_we_think_we_know.html Jonathan Drori on what we think we know | Video on TED.com ref  In fact, 99% of a tree's mass comes from the air. ref name TedTalk 

  Wishing trees  

A Wish Tree (or wishing tree) is a single tree, usually distinguished by species, position or appearance, which is used as an object of wishes and offerings. Such trees are identified as possessing a special religious or spiritual value. By tradition, believers make votive offerings in order to gain from that nature spirit, saint or goddess fulfillment of a wish.

  Tree worship  
Tree worship refers to the tendency of many  society societies  in all of history to worship or otherwise mythologize  trees . Trees have played a very important role in many of the world's  mythology mythologies  and  religion s, and have been given deep and sacred meanings throughout the ages. Human beings, seeing the growth and death of trees, the   elasticity  of their branches, the sensitiveness and the annual (every year) decay and revival of their foliage, see them as powerful symbols of growth, decay and  resurrection . The most ancient cross-cultural symbolic representation of the  universe 's construction is the 'world tree'. 

  World tree  
 File:yggdrasil.jpg thumb|200px| Yggdrasil , the World Ash (Norse) 

The tree, with its branches reaching up into the sky, and roots deep into the earth, can be seen to  wikt:dwell dwell  in three worlds - a link between heaven, the earth, and the underworld, uniting above and below. It is also both a feminine symbol, bearing sustenance; and a masculine,  phallic  symbol - another union.

For this reason, many mythologies around the world have the concept of the World tree, a great tree that acts as an  Axis mundi , holding up the cosmos, and providing a link between the heavens, earth and underworld. In European mythology the best known example is the tree  Yggdrasil  from  Norse mythology . ref name Mountfort 2003 41 

The world tree is also an important part of  Mesoamerica n mythologies, where it represents the four  cardinal direction s ( north ,  south ,  east , and  west ). The concept of the world tree is also closely linked to the motif of the Tree of life.

  In literature  

In literature, a mythology was notably developed by  J.R.R. Tolkien , his Two Trees of Valinor playing a central role in his  1964  Tree and Leaf .  William Butler Yeats  describes a "holy tree" in his poem  The Two Trees  (1893).

  List of trees  

There are many types of trees. Here is a list of some of them:
   Coconut Coconut Tree 
   Cottonwood Tree 
   Eucalyptus Gum tree 
   Fir 
   Horse chestnut 
   Mangrove 
   Maple 
   Oak 
   Palm tree Palm 
   Pine tree Pine 
   Redwood Tree 
   Rubber Tree 
   Willow 
   Yew 
   Birch tree Birch 

  Related pages  
 Wattezia  is the earliest tree in the fossil record.

  References  
 reflist 

  Other websites  
 commons Trees 
   http://www.globaltrees.org/ Global Trees Campaign website 
   http://www.bgci.org.uk/ Botanic Gardens Conservation International website 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Trees  