Islamic world

nosources date April 2009 
 File:OIC Member States.png 230px|thumbnail|right|The map showing the Counties who cooperate in Islamic community organisation 
The  Islamic World  consists of all people who are in  Islam . It is not an exact location, but rather a  community . When they do things together as Muslims, they are the " umma ", which means "community" referring to all of the believers. The faith emphasizes unity and defense of fellow Muslims, so it is common for these nations to cooperate.  Recent conflicts in the Muslim World  have sometimes spread because of this desire to cooperate (see below). It is also likely that some have been made shorter and less damaging because of it. Some might even have never started.

  Demographics  
Muslims are in many countries. In 52 nations, Muslims are the majority. Almost all are  Sunni . They speak about 60 languages and come from all ethnic backgrounds. 

  10.4 million Muslims in  Canada  and the  United States 
  2.2 million Muslims in  Latin America Latin  and  Central America 
  10.0 million Muslims in the  European Union  plus  Bosnia-Herzegovina  and  Albania 
  few or none in  Eastern Europe ,  Norway 
  62.4 million Muslims in  Turkey 
  284.4 million Muslims in the  Arab League  including  Iraq  (with about 15 million  Shia , 60% of the population)
  254.0 Muslims in  Sub-Saharan Africa 
  65.4 million Muslims (90%  Shia ) in  Iran 
  48.5 million Muslims in  Central Asia  - in  Azerbaijan ,  Uzebekistan ,  Tajikistan ,  Kazakhstan ,  Kyrgyzstan ,  Turkmenistan  - formerly  republics of the Soviet Union .
  26.7 million Muslims in  Russia 
  22.7 million Muslims in  Afghanistan 
  230.0 million Muslims in  Pakistan  and  Bangladesh  (formerly  Bangladesh#History East Bengal  provincial region).
  133.3 million Muslims in  Republic of India  (included  Jammu and Kashmir ) - the world's largest minority population
  133.1 million Muslims in  China  - a close second
34.6 million Muslims in Somalia
  196.3 million Muslims in  Indonesia 
  30.0 million Muslims in the rest of  South-East Asia , especially  Malaysia 
  few or none in Japan, Australia, New Zealand, Mongolia, or the South Pacific

  1.5 billion people total

  Media  
The  Al-Jazeera  satellite TV network in the  Arabic language  is a news source many Muslims watch.

In most Muslim nations, the government is the main source of news. This sometimes makes it very difficult or dangerous to make anti-government statements.

There are, however, many other news programmes and websites in the Muslim world.

  Islam in law and ethics  
 Islamic law  exists in many variations - in Arabic it is called  shariah  - five schools of which were created centuries ago. These are the  classical fiqh : the  Hanafi  school from  India ,  Pakistan  and  Bangaladesh ,  West Africa ,  Egypt , the  Maliki  in  North Africa  and  West Africa , the  Shafi  in  Malaysia  and  Indonesia , the  Hanbali  in  Arabia , and  Jaferi  in  Iran  and  Iraq  - where the majority is  Shia . All five are very old and many Muslims feel a new fiqh must be created for modern  society . Islam has a method for doing this,  al-urf  and  ijtihad  are the words to describe this method, but they have not been used in a long time, and few people are trusted enough to use them to make new laws.

So, in most of the Muslim world, people are very conservative, especially about  alcohol ,  adultery ,  abortion  and  women  working in jobs where they are used to lure customers.

 Muslim women  often dress extremely modestly, and many do so by choice. But in some countries they have been forced to do so against their will. This is one of the things that causes tension between the  Western World  and that of Muslims.

 Islamic economics  bans  debt  but in most Muslim countries Western  banking  is allowed. This is another issue that many Muslims have with the Western world.

  Islam in politics  
One quarter of the  world  population share Islam as an  ethical tradition . 

Many people in these countries also see  Islam as a political movement . In democratic countries there is usually at least one  Islamic party .

 Political Islam  is powerful in all Muslim-majority countries.  Islamic parties  in  Pakistan  and  Algeria  have taken power. 

Many in these movements call themselves  Islamist s, which also sometimes describes more  militant Islam ic groups. The relationships between these groups and their views of democracy are complex.

Some of these groups are called  terrorist s because they attack civilians of other non-Muslim nations, to make a political point.

  Conflicts with Israel and the US  
 Israel  is very unpopular in the Muslim world, because of the  Israeli-Palestinian conflict  and the way that the state of Israel came into being in  1948  which many  Arab s thought was unfair.

Some Muslims see this as a fight against  Judaism  or  Jew s, but not all. In  Morocco  for instance, the Islamists recently invited  Jew s to join the party. Jewish groups also cooperate with Arabs in the  West Bank , where  Neturei Karta  (anti-Zionist orthodox Jewish) leader Rabbi  Mosche Hirsch  served as the Minister for Jewish Affairs in the  Fatah  before there was a  Palestinian Authority . Like the Arabs, this small group of Jews thought the way Israel was created was not right. However, very few Jews believe this, and most support Israel as a state.

In  1979  there was a big shift in the way the Muslim world dealt with the rest of the world. In that year,  Egypt  made peace with  Israel ,  Iran  became an  Islamic state  after a  revolution , and there was an  1979 invasion of Afghanistan invasion of Afghanistan  by the  Soviet Union . A lot of things changed in that year. By  2001  the  Soviet Union  was gone,  Jordan  had also made peace with Israel, and on  September 11, 2001  there were major attacks on the U.S. - which most people believe were made to drive the United States out of the Muslim world, especially  Saudi Arabia . In many ways the events of 1979 led to the events of 2001.

The  2001 invasion of Afghanistan  and  2003 invasion of Iraq  are called part of a  War on Terrorism  by the  United States . Many or most Muslims see it as a  War on Islam . After the invasion, the  Islamic parties  won more seats, and a majority of Muslims polled in many nations expressed support for  Osama bin Laden  and said he would "do the right thing".  Olivier Roy  is a French scholar who thinks that this does not express support for  al-Qaeda  or  militant Islam  but opposing  colonialism  and what many Muslims call  racism  - favourable treatment for Jews especially those living in  West Bank settlement s, many of whom have American or British passport, and which the  United Nations  says have no right to live there.

The situation is very complicated and there are many different views of it.

  Organization  
The  Organization of Islamic Conference  formed in  1969  lets the Muslim nations work as a group.  Russia  joined in  2003 .

The  Arab League  is a smaller group of only the Arab countries.

 OPEC  is another forum where issues between the Muslim and non-Muslim world come up. In  1973  to protest U.S. support for Israel there was an  1973 oil embargo oil embargo  which caused the  1973 energy crisis .

  Related pages 
 History of Islam 
 Hajj 

 Category:Islam World