Biology

File:Mimicry by fly.JPG thumb|150px| Animals :  Hoverfly  on a  Compositae   inflorescence 
 File:Zboze.jpg thumb|150px| Plants :  Wheat 
 File:Morchella esculenta 08.jpg thumb|150px| Fungi :  Morchella  esculenta 
 File:Gemmatimonas aurantiaca.jpg thumb|150px| Bacteria 
 File:Halobacteria.jpg thumb|150px| Archaea :  Haloarchaea 
 File:Gamma phage.png thumb|150px| Virus : Gamma  bacteriophage 

 Biology  is the  science  of life and living things, and their  evolution . Living things include  animal s,  plants ,  fungi  (such as  mushroom s), and  microorganisms  such as  bacteria  and  archaea .

People who study biology are called  biologists . Biology looks at how animals and other organisms behave and work, and what they are like. Biology also studies how  organism s react with each other and the  environment . It has existed as a  science  for about 200 years, and was preceded by  natural history . Biology has many  research  fields and  branch es. Like all sciences, biology uses the  scientific method . This means that biologists must be able to show  evidence  for their ideas, and that other biologists must be able to test the ideas for themselves.

Biology attempts to answer questions such as:
"What are the characteristics of this living thing?" ( comparative anatomy );
"How do the parts work?" ( physiology );
"How should we group living things?" ( Biological classification classification ,  taxonomy );
"What does this living thing do?" ( behaviour ,  growth );
"How does  inheritance  work? ( genetics ); "What has been the history of life?" ( palaeontology ). How do organisms relate to their  environment ? ( ecology ). All modern biology is influenced by  evolution , which answers the question: "How has the living world come to be as it is?"

  Branches of biology  
   Anatomy 
   Botany 
   Biochemistry 
   Biogeography 
   Biophysics 
   Cell biology 
   Cytology 
   Developmental biology 
   Ecology 
   Entomology 
   Ethology 
   Evolution  /  Evolutionary biology 
   Embryology 
   Genetics  /  Genome Genomics 
   Herpetology 
   Histology 
   Human biology  /  Anthropology  /  Primatology 
   Ichthyology 
   Limnology 
   Mammalogy 
   Marine biology 
   Microbiology  /  Bacteria Bacteriology 
   Molecular biology 
   Fungi Mycology  /  Lichen ology
   Ornithology 
   Parasitism Parasitology 
   Palaeontology 
   Phycology 
   Phylogenetics 
   Physiology 
   Taxonomy 
   Virology 
   Zoology 

 commons 

 Category:Biology   
 Category:Science-related lists