Theatre

File:Epidaurus Theater.jpg thumb|300px|Panoramic view of the Hellenic theatre at Epidaurus. 
 File:Rutentheater 2006 Hymne.jpg thumb|300px|A young cast of "Princess Turandot" 
 File:P culture.svg thumb|180px|masks of  tragedy  and  comedy 

 Theatre  (British English and also American English), or  Theater  (mostly American English), has several meanings.

The word comes originally from the Greek  Theatron , meaning roughly, 'a place to behold'. In American English, the word 'theater' can mean either a place where films are shown (this is also called a  cinema ) or a place where live stage plays are performed. ref Brown, John Russell. 1997.  What is theatre?: an introduction and exploration . Boston and Oxford: Focal P. ISBN 978-0-240-80232-9 ref  In British English, 'theatre' means a place where live  Play (theatre) plays  are performed.  Some people, both English and American, use the spelling 'theatre' to mean a place where live plays are performed, and the spelling 'theater' to mean a cinema.

'Theatre' can also mean the business of putting on plays. An actor might say "I am in the theatre business", or a writer might say "I write for the theatre", meaning that they write plays, rather than writing for movies or television shows. ref Banham, Martin, ed. 1998.  The Cambridge guide to theatre . Cambridge: Cambridge UP. ISBN 0-521-43437-8 ref ref Hartnoll, Phyllis, ed. 1983.  The Oxford companion to the theatre . 4th ed, Oxford: Oxford UP. ISBN 978-0-19-211546-1 ref 

  History  
 File:Roman theatre, bosra, syria, easter 2004.jpg thumb|left|220px|An ancient Roman theatre in  Syria 
 File:Musee de la bible et Terre Sainte 001.JPG thumb|left|220px| Neolithic  stone mask, 7,000 years BC. 
  Ancient Greece  
 Main article:  Theatre of Ancient Greece 
The first people we know created plays were the Ancient Greeks, about the year 500 B.C. They divided plays into two kinds:  tragedy  and  comedy . This division is still used today. The best known Ancient Greek writers of plays are  Aeschylus ,  Sophocles ,  Euripides  and  Aristophanes . Some of their plays survived, and are still performed today. 

These ancient Greek plays were performed outdoors in large amphitheatres, so that many people could see them. There were contests among the playwrights (people who write plays are called playwrights) and the winner would get a prize.

The Greeks had many brilliant ideas. They used mechanical devices like  trap door nowiki s and the  machina : a crane for winching gods on and off the stage (hence 'Deus ex machina'). They had a  Greek chorus  that offered information to help the audience follow the performance. The chorus comments on themes, and shows how an audience might react to the drama. The players wore  mask s. Illustrations on vases show  helmet -like masks, covering the entire face and head, with holes for the eyes and a small aperture for the mouth, plus a wig. The mask was to 'melt' into the face and allow the actor to vanish into the role. Therefore, onlookers did not think about the actor, but thought about the character.

  Middle Ages  
In the  Middle Ages , the  Catholic Church  began to use theatre as a way of telling the stories from the  Bible  to people who did not know how to read.  They wrote  Mystery Plays , where each part of the Bible story would be a play put on by a different group of people.  They wrote  miracle plays  which were about the lives of the  saint nowiki s.  They wrote  morality plays  which taught the audiences how to live a good Christian life.

  Commedia dell'arte plays  
 File:Harlekin Columbine Tivoli Denmark.jpg thumb|Harlequine and Columbine 
In the 1500s, groups of  actor s toured around Italy performing comic plays to entertain townspeople.  These plays were called  Commedia dell'arte , and different stories would be created around the same group of characters.  Often the spoken lines would be made up by the actors for each performance.

Other kinds of plays called Neoclassical Dramas and Neoclassical Comedies were also popular in Italy and in France at this time. These plays were written to copy the style of the plays from Ancient Greece and Rome.

  Elizabethan theatre  
At the end of the sixteenth century (before 1600), the traveling actors began to perform in fixed theatre buildings. This was the period when  William Shakespeare  wrote. He lived from 1564 to 1616. At that time, in England, women were not allowed to perform, so male actors would play female characters. 

His theatre was in London, England. It was called The Globe. It was an outdoor theatre and plays were performed in the daytime for large audiences. His plays were very popular and many are still performed today. Many people believe Shakespeare was one of the best playwrights (a writer of plays). 

He wrote many kinds of plays: tragedies, comedies, romances and also history plays. All of his plays are written in beautiful, poetic language. Many of the plays were set in exotic, far-away places that would be interesting to London audiences. His plays are still popular today for many reasons. His characters (the people in his plays) are interesting and talk about interesting ideas. 

The stories he tells in his plays are often exciting, very funny (in the comedies), or very sad (in the tragedies) and make you want to know what happens to his characters. He says much about things we still think about today, like love, sadness, hope, pride, hatred, jealousy, and foolishness.
 File:Zoffany-Garrick & Cibber in Venice Preserved.jpg thumb|left|250px|Famous actors of the 1700s, David Garrick and Susannah Cibber in  Venice Preserved . 

Plays including Shakespeare's were banned during  the Protectorate' . After that, many more were written and acted.

  Plays from the 1900s  
After World War II, playwrights in Europe and the United States began doing plays in a new style called "Theatre of the Absurd." After seeing the horrors of war, these playwrights felt that all their old values had been destroyed. Playwrights such as  Samuel Beckett ,  Eugene Ionesco ,  Harold Pinter , and  Jean Genet  wrote plays that are considered to be "Theatre of the Absurd." 

The "Theatre of the Absurd" plays have some of the same ideas that are found in the  philosophy  (a way of thinking) called  existentialism . Existentialism is very different from many other  philosophies . Most religions and philosopies say that human life has a meaning (or a purpose). The philosophy of existentialism is that human life does not have a meaning (or a purpose). When something has no meaning, it is "absurd". (absurd means means silly and meaningless.)

The plays written in this style make people think about questions like "what is it like to be a person in the world?" and "what does it mean for a person to be free?" They are often filled with sad emotions, such as worry, fear, and thoughts about death.

  Theatre breaks  
Theatre breaks are a form of short holiday, based around viewing a theatrical convention show. Theatre breaks tend to include a nights hotel accommodation included in the price. 

  References  
 Commons Theatre 
 Reflist 


 Category:Theater  