Encyclopedia

File:Danimarca XIII secolo, plinio historia naturalis.JPG thumb|A richly decorated edition of  Pliny the Elder Pliny 's   Naturalis historia  from the 13th century. It was first published AD 77 ndash 79. Pliny died in the  Volcanic eruption eruption  of  Vesuvius , AD 79 

An  encyclopedia  (or  encyclopaedia ,  cyclopaedia ,  encyclopaedia ) is a collection (usually a book) of  information .  Some are called "encyclopedic dictionaries".

All encyclopedias were printed, until the late 20th century when some were on  CD-ROM . 21st century encyclopedias are mostly online by  Internet .
The largest encyclopedia in the English language is  English Wikipedia , which has more than 5 million articles. The second largest is the  Encyclopaedia Britannica , which is the largest one that is  Publishing printed . Some languages have a larger printed encyclopedia and some have none.  Some people think Wikipedia is also better, but others think it is less reliable.   Either kind of encyclopedia can inform us on many different topics.

The first encyclopedias may have begun as  lecture  notes of teachers of ancient schools, such as  Aristotle 's school. Each volume in the encyclopedia was for a different subject or course of study. The word encyclopedia at first meant the teachings of the school.  Dubious  The name "encyclopedia" is from the  16th century  and meant "complete knowledge".

After the  printing press  was invented, dictionaries with long definitions began to be called encyclopedias. For example, a  dictionary  of science, if it included  essay s, was thought of as an encyclopedia or knowledgeable book on the subject of science. Some encyclopedias then put essays on more than one subject in alphabetical order instead of grouping them together by subject. The word, encyclopedia, was put in the title of some encyclopedias. 

Companies were started for the purpose of publishing encyclopedias for the public use in libraries, which is different from when an encyclopedia was the curriculum of a private school. Like dictionaries, these publishers hired hundreds of experts to write articles and read and choose articles. Some internet encyclopedias allowed their paying customers to submit articles. Other internet encyclopedias accepted writing from non-paying users of the encyclopedia. 
 ref 
  The Compact Edition of the Oxford English Dictionary, Volume I A-O. 1971. Encyclopedia. New York: Oxford University Press.
  Webster's Third New International Dictionary . . . Unabridged . . . Merriam-Webster. 1961. Encyclopedia. Springfield, MA: G & C Merriam Company.
  Funk & Wagnalls New Encyclopedia, Volume 9. MCMLXXXIII. Encyclopedia. USA: Funk & Wagnalls, Inc.
  The Columbia Encyclopedia in one volume. 1940. Encyclopedia. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
  Britanica.com
  Wikipedia.org
 ref 

  Types of encyclopedias  
There are different types of encyclopedias. Some are general and have pages on lots of topics. The English language  Encyclopaedia Britannica  and German  Brockhaus  are general encyclopedias. Some are about specific topics. For example, there are encyclopedias of  medicine  or  philosophy . Others include the  Dictionary of National Biography , the  Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships , and  Black's Law Dictionary . There are also encyclopedias that that cover many topics with one  wikt:perspective perspective  or one cultural  bias . The  Great Soviet Encyclopedia  is one of these.

There are two main ways of organizing printed encyclopedias: from A to Z (the  alphabet ical way) or by categories. Most encyclopedias go from A to Z.

Many  dictionary dictionaries  have similar information to encyclopedias

  References  
 Reflist 

 Commons category Encyclopedias 
 Category:Encyclopedias  