Mercury (element)

File:Pouring liquid mercury bionerd.jpg thumb|Mercury 
 Mercury , also known as  quicksilver ref cite web url http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/quicksilver title quicksilver definition accessdate October 13, 2008 publisher Dictionary.com Unabridged (v 1.1) ref  or  hydrargyrum , is a  chemical element . Its  symbol  on the  periodic table  is  Hg , and its [[atomic number] ]is 80. Its  atomic mass  is 200.59.

The symbol  Hg  stands for its  Latin language Latinized   Greek language Greek  name  hydrargyrum , meaning watery or  liquid   silver .

 History 
 Image:Mercury symbol.svg thumb|The symbol for  Mercury (planet) the planet Mercury  () has been used for a very long time to represent the element 
No one has the credit for finding mercury. It was found in ancient history. Mercury was found in  Ancient Egypt Egyptian   tomb s that are from 1500 BC. ref cite web title Mercury and the environment -- Basic facts publisher Environment Canada , Federal Government of Canada  year 2004 url http://www.ec.gc.ca/MERCURY/EN/bf.cfm accessdate 2008-03-27 ref  Chinese people also knew it from long ago. ref cite web title Mercury -- Element of the ancients publisher Center for Environmental Health Sciences,  Dartmouth College  url http://www.dartmouth.edu/~toxmetal/metals/stories/mercury.html accessdate 2008-03-27 ref  In  China  and  Tibet , people thought using mercury would make them live longer and have better health. One of China's  emperor s,  Qin Shi Huang Qin Shi Huang Di , is said to have been buried in a tomb with rivers of flowing mercury. He was killed by drinking a  mixture  of mercury and  powder ed  jade  because he wanted to live forever. ref cite web title Qin Shihuang publisher Ministry of Culture,  People's Republic of China  year 2003 url http://www.chinaculture.org/gb/en_aboutchina/2003-09/24/content_22854.htm accessdate 2008-03-27 ref ref name wright cite book title The History of China year 2001 author Wright, David Curtis publisher  Greenwood Publishing Group isbn 031330940X page 49 ref  However, this only made him die of  liver  failure,  poison ing, and  brain death . The  ancient Greece ancient Greeks  used mercury in  wikt:ointment ointments . The  ancient Egypt Egyptians  and the  Roman Empire Romans  used it in  cosmetics . These cosmetics sometimes hurt and made faces uglier.

 Properties 
 Physical properties 

Mercury is a silvery-white liquid  post-transition metal . The reason for mercury being a liquid is quite complex. It is quite heavy; a chunk of  iron  can float on mercury. Compared to other  metal s, it does not  wikt:conduct conduct   heat  well. However, it conducts electricity fairly well. ref name CRC cite book author Hammond C.R title The Elements, in Handbook of Chemistry and Physics 81st edition publisher CRC press year 2000 isbn   0849304814 url http://www-d0.fnal.gov/hardware/cal/lvps_info/engineering/elements.pdf ref  Mercury is the only metal with a known  melting point  (-38.83 degC) lower than  caesium . ref The radioactive element  francium  may also have a lower melting point, but its radioactivity prevents enough of it from being isolated for direct testing. br cite web url http://periodic.lanl.gov/elements/87.html   title Francium  publisher Periodic.lanl.gov  accessdate 2010-02-23 ref ref name autogenerated1 cite web url http://pubs.acs.org/cen/80th/print/cesium.html   title C&EN: It's elemental: the Periodic Table - Caesium  publisher American Chemical Society accessdate 2010-02-25 author Kaner, Richard year   2003 ref  Mercury is one of the two elements that are  liquid s at room temperature and normal pressure.  Bromine  is the other one. ref cite web url http://antoine.frostburg.edu/chem/senese/101/inorganic/faq/why-is-mercury-liquid.shtml  title Why is mercury a liquid at STP?  accessdate May 1, 2007  publisher General Chemistry Online at Frostburg State University  author Fred Senese ref ref Green, J. and Damji, S.  Chemistry , Melton: IBID Press, 3rd ed. 2007 ref 

Mercury may be seen as a  transition metal , but it is normally seen as a post-transition metal. It is in  Group 12  of the periodic table. Mercury has seven stable (non radioactive )  isotope s.  sup 202 sup Hg is the most common isotope. Mercury makes a blue to  ultraviolet  color in a tube when a  spark  is passed through it. The ultraviolet light can kill germs.

 Chemical properties 
Mercury is an  unreactive  metal. It does not  corrosion corrode  in air unless  hydrogen sulfide  is also there, similar to  silver . Mercury can  oxidation oxidize  to mercury(II) oxide when heated in air. If it is heated further, it decomposes into mercury and oxygen again. It does not dissolve in ordinary  acid s, but can dissolve in  oxidizing agent oxidizing  acids to make mercury  salt s. It can make  amalgam s when mixed with most metals, like  aluminium ,  gold , and  zinc .  Iron ,  tantalum ,  tungsten , and  platinum  do not make amalgams with mercury. Iron flasks were used to trade mercury because of this.

Mercury can dissolve large amounts of aluminium metal, making it dangerous to transport in aluminium containers. The thin layer of oxide on aluminium stops it from amalgamating (making an amalgam with) aluminium, but the oxide coating can be damaged to expose the metal. Then the aluminium metal is dissolved and oxidizes to  aluminium oxide . The aluminium oxide forms a solid and releases the mercury, which amalgamates more aluminium. This process keeps repeating until a large amount of aluminium is dissolved.

 Chemical compounds 
 multiple image
   width1   186
   image1   Mercury Chloride.jpg
   caption1    center Mercury chloride, br possibly mercury(I) chloride center 
   width2   180
   image2   HgOpowder.jpg
   caption2    center Mercury(II) oxide center 
 
 multiple image
   width1   186
   image1   Cinnabar-d6a.jpg
   caption1    center Cinnabar, mercury(II) sulfide center 
   width2   180
   image2   Calomel-bem-10b.jpg
   caption2    center Mercury(I) chloride as a mineral center 
 
 File:Mercuryfulminate puryfied.jpg thumb|alt=|Mercury(II) fulminate 
Mercury forms  chemical compound s in 2  oxidation state s: +1 and +2. Mercury(I) compounds are weak  oxidizing agent s and weak  reducing agent s. Most of them are colorless. They easily  disproportionation disproportionate  to mercury(II) compounds and mercury metal. They react with oxygen in the air to make mercury(II) compounds. Many mercury(I) compounds do not dissolve in water.  Mercury(I) chloride  is one of the most common mercury(I) compounds. Mercury(II) compounds are strong  oxidizing agent s and very corrosive. Mercury(II) compounds are red, yellow, or colorless.  Mercury(II) oxide  and  mercury(II) chloride  are the most common mercury(II) compounds in the  laboratory .

One thing they have in common is that they are all toxic. The soluble ones are more toxic than the insoluble ones.

 Mercury(I) compounds 
Also known as mercurous compounds, these are weak  reducing agent s and weak  oxidizing agent s. Most of them do not dissolve in water, making them less toxic than mercury(II) compounds. Most of them are colorless or yellow.
 Mercury(I) bromide , insouble white solid
 Mercury(I) chloride , calomel, insoluble, white
 Mercury(I) fluoride , light yellow
 Mercury(I) iodide , a little soluble, unstable, yellow
 Mercury(I) nitrate , very slightly soluble, white
 Mercury(I) sulfate , light yellow solid

 Mercury(II) compounds 
Also known as mercuric compounds, these are strong oxidizing agents. Most of them dissolve in water, making them very toxic. They are colorless or red.
 Mercury(II) bromide , white solid
 Mercury(II) chloride , white solid, corrosive sublimate
 Mercury(II) fluoride , white solid
 Mercury(II) iodide , somewhat soluble, bright red
 Mercury(II) oxide , orange, yellow or red, does not dissolve in water like most oxides
 Mercury(II) nitrate , soluble, white, used to make hats
 Mercury(II) sulfate , white solid
 Mercury(II) sulfide , red solid

 Organomercury compounds 
These contain mercury reacted with a  organic chemistry organic  molecule. They are even more toxic than other mercury compounds since they get absorbed very easily.
 Dimethylmercury , colorless, extremely toxic liquid

 Occurrence 
 File:Mercury-27128.jpg thumb|Small blobs of liquid mercury as an element along with streaks of cinnabar 
 File:Mercury-61215.jpg thumb|Another rock with liquid mercury on it 
Mercury is a rare metal. It is about as common as  silver . Mercury is not expensive like silver because the mercury is very easy to get from the places where it is found. Mercury can be found in elemental (liquid) form in nature, but this is not common. Mercury as an element is the only  liquid  that is recognized as a mineral by  the  International Mineralogical Association . ref http://pubsites.uws.edu.au/ima-cnmnc/IMA2009-01%20UPDATE%20160309.pdf IMA/CNMNC List of Mineral Names  (PDF 1.8 MB; p 184) ref ref name Railsback L.B. Railsback  Definitions   http://www.gly.uga.edu/railsback/Fundamentals/SFMGMineralDefinition09-II.pdf  and  http://www.gly.uga.edu/railsback/Fundamentals/SFMGMineralDefinition09-III.pdf ref  It is most often found in the form of  cinnabar , a  mercury(II) sulfide   mineral . The biggest deposits of cinnabar used to be found in Spain, but now are found in China. It also occurs in other minerals like  calomel , a mercury(I) chloride mineral.

 Preparation 
 China  and  Kyrgyzstan  are the two main makers of mercury. Mines in Italy, the United States, and Mexico have been closed. China is opening more mines because the  European Union  wants to use  fluorescent bulb fluorescent lights , which need mercury.

Mercury is made by roasting cinnabar in a furnace. The  sulfide  is oxidized to  sulfur dioxide , leaving mercury behind.

 Uses of mercury 
 Medical uses 
Mercury has been used in  dentistry dental  fillings until it was replaced with safer materials. They are an  amalgam  of mercury with another element. An organic mercury compound called thiomersal is used to preserve  vaccine s. ref cite web author   FDA url    http://www.fda.gov/Cber/vaccine/thimerosal.htm title   Thimerosal in Vaccines accessdate October 25, 2006 ref  Merbromin, another organic mercury compound, is used as an  antiseptic . It has been banned in some countries like the US. ref cite web url http://www.straightdope.com/columns/read/2518/what-happened-to-mercurochrome accessdate 2009-07-07 title What happened to Mercurochrome? date July 23, 2004 ref 

Mercury(I) chloride (also known as calomel or mercurous chloride) has been used as a  diuretic , skin  disinfectant , and  laxative . Together with other mercury compounds,  Mercury(II) chloride  (also known as mercuric chloride or corrosive sublimate) was used to treat  syphilis . The problem with this was that mercury(II) chloride is very toxic. Sometimes the symptoms of its toxicity were confused with those of the syphilis it was believed to treat. ref cite news author Pimple, K.D. Pedroni, J.A. Berdon, V. date July 9, 2002 url http://www.indiana.edu/~poynter/sas/lb/syphilis.html title Syphilis in history publisher Poynter Center for the Study of Ethics and American Institutions at Indiana University-Bloomington accessdate  April 17, 2005 ref  It is also used as a disinfectant.  :en:Blue_mass Blue mass , a pill or syrup in which mercury is the main ingredient, was prescribed throughout the 1800s for different conditions such as constipation,  Major depressive disorder depression , child-bearing and  toothache s. ref cite news title   Did Mercury in "Little Blue Pills" Make Abraham Lincoln Erratic? author Mayell, H. url   http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2001/07/0717_lincoln.html work   National Geographic Society National Geographic News   date  2007-07-17 accessdate   2008-06-15
 ref  In the early 20th century, mercury was given to children once a year as a laxative and dewormer. Teething powders for infants also had it in them. 

Since the 1930s some  vaccine s have contained the preservative  thiomersal . In the body, this is changed to  ethylmercury . At first it was thought that this mercury-based preservative can cause or trigger  autism  in children, but scientific studies could not show such a link. ref cite journal  journal Pediatrics  year 2004  volume 114  page 793 title  Thimerosal-containing vaccines and autistic spectrum disorder: a critical review of published original data  author  Parker SK, Schwartz B, Todd J, Pickering LK  doi 10.1542/peds.2004-0434  pmid 15342856 issue 3  pages 793-804   http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/cgi/content/full/115/1/200 Erratum  (2005).  Pediatrics  115 (1): 200.  DOI 10.1542/peds.2004-2402  PMID 15630018. ref  Because of this, thiomersal has been removed from most U.S. vaccines recommended for children six years of age and under. ref cite web  date 2007-09-06  url http://www.fda.gov/cber/vaccine/thimerosal.htm   accessdate 2007-10-01  title  Thimerosal in vaccines  publisher  Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration ref  There are certain exceptions to this rule for  influenza  vaccines. In some cases, vaccines may still have very small amounts of thiomersal in them.

Cinnabar is still an important component of traditional Chinese, Tibetan, and Ayurvedic medicine. Certain countries do not allow the use of mercury or its compounds in drugs. For this reason, cinnabar has recently been replaced with less toxic products. 

Today, the use of mercury in medicine has greatly declined in all respects, especially in developed countries.  Thermometer s and blood pressure devices using mercury were invented in the early 18th and late 19th centuries, respectively. Now their use is declining and has been banned in some countries, states and medical institutions. In 2002, the  U.S. Senate  passed legislation to phase out the sale of non-prescription mercury thermometers. In 2003,  Washington (U.S. state) Washington  and  Maine  became the first states to ban mercury blood pressure devices. ref cite web url http://www.noharm.org/details.cfm?ID=782 title Two States Pass First-time Bans on Mercury Blood Pressure Devices date June 2, 2003 publisher Health Care Without Harm accessdate May 1, 2007 ref  Mercury compounds are in some over-the-counter drugs, including topical antiseptics, stimulant laxatives, diaper rash  ointment , eye drops, and nasal sprays. The  Food and Drug Administration FDA  has "inadequate data to establish general recognition of the safety and effectiveness" of the mercury in these products. ref cite web url http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=310.545&SearchTerm=mercury  title Title 21--Food and Drugs Chapter I--Food and Drug Administration Department of Health and Human Services Subchapter D--Drugs for Human Use Code of federal regulations publisher United States Food and Drug Administration accessdate May 1, 2007 ref  Mercury is still used in some diuretics, although other things can be used for most therapeutic uses.

 Other uses 
Mercury is also used:
 In  cosmetics , ( thiomersal  is widely used to make  mascara .)
 As a liquid electrolyte in a variant of the  chloralkali process .
 In  mining , especially of  gold  and  silver .
 In  mercury-vapor lamp s and  fluorescent lamp s.
 Certain   thermometer s,  barometer s and  manometer s. Because of its toxicity, it can be replaced by  alcohol  for most of these uses.
 Certain  electricity electrical  switches that turn on or off when tilted.

 Toxicity 
Mercury is liquid at room temperature, and  fume s of mercury are very poisonous. Ingested elemental mercury is less dangerous. The biggest problems are  organic chemistry organic  mercury compounds which are eaten with food. However, inorganic compounds such as  mercury(II) nitrate  are also highly toxic by ingestion (eating) or inhalation (breathing in) of the dust. ref name msds cite web url   http://msds.chem.ox.ac.uk/ME/mercuric_sulphide.html title Safety data for mercuric sulphide accessdate 2009-07-07 publisher Oxford University ref  Mercury can cause both chronic and acute poisoning.

In the year 1810, over 200 people died of mercury poisoning on the ship  Triumph  because a barrel of mercury had leaked. 

Mercury is extremely  poison ous and has to be used carefully. When mercury is spilled, there are special ways to clean it up. ref cite web url http://www.epa.gov/mercury/spills/index.htm title Mercury: Spills, Disposal and Site Cleanup publisher Environmental Protection Agency accessdate 2007-08-11 ref  Smaller drops should be combined to a larger drop on hard surfaces to be removed more easily (for example, being pushed into a bag that can be thrown away).  Vacuum cleaner s and  broom s should not be used. This is because they can spread mercury even more. Afterwards, elements such as  sulfur  or  zinc  powder should be sprinkled over the place, then collected and cleaned away. It is not easy to clean mercury entirely off clothing, so it is better not to use them anymore. Breathing in mercury vapor is also very dangerous. ref name msds 

 Related pages 
 Mercury compounds 
 List of common elements 
 Periodic table 

  References  
 Reflist 2 

 wiktionary 
 Periodic Table 

 Category:Metals 
 Category:Chemical elements