Test

File:Test (student assessment).jpeg thumb|Students working on a test. 

A  test  is a way of checking something to see if it is true, or false, or if it is edible or not. If something can be tested, or finishes the tests correctly, it is testable. The  Concise Oxford English Dictionary  defines a test as: "a procedure intended to establish the quality, performance, or reliability of something". ref cite book title Concise Oxford English Dictionary edition Twelfth date 2011 page 1490 first1 Angus last1 Stevenson first2 Maurice last2 Waite publisher Oxford University Press isbn 978-0-19-960108-0 ref 

A test is different from an  experiment : Before a test is done, there is an  expected value expected result . The test is performed, to show this result. In an experiment, the outcome is open. Very often, tests are performed as part of an experiment.

 Products 
Products are usually tested for quality, and so that many customers will get the best products.

 People 
 wikt:people People  are tested to see what they have learned. This is often called an  wikt:assessment assessment  or  examination . In  learning , a test item is a  question , or set of questions.

Many people think tests are valuable. They believe tests:
  are a quick and fair way of judging a test taker's performance
  enable predictions about test takers to be made
  allow selection
  improve performance by highlighting areas that need work.

However, academic tests are not perfect measures. The educator  Salman Khan (educator) Salman Khan  said this about tests in his 2012 book  The One World Schoolhouse: Education Reimagined : ref cite book url https://docs.google.com/a/nu.edu.pk/viewer?a=v&q=cache:mNZ4c51O_D0J:emilkirkegaard.dk/en/wp-content/uploads/The-One-World-Schoolhouse-Salman-Khan.pdf+&hl=en&pid=bl&srcid=ADGEESg0LadSOu_A7bPvWpBKiBEt9ZAQdUmH09kekpkIqrzjX4OmdStDO2VVeTKdEesvhvtbEG1bFPG_qk6fvGcrtf3qks6P4LuBkbj97PeiYT9N3X99wxkVpm2NE_bo95vU6WJEdpMD&sig=AHIEtbS6BavDm_U4gRJuxHFMJxhYCXitqg isbn 9781444755770 title The One World Schoolhouse: Education Reimagined publisher Hodder & Stoughton first Salman last Khan page 92 date 2012 ref 

 blockquote Tests measure the  approximate  state of a student's memory and  perhaps  understanding, in regard to a particular subset of subject matter at a given moment in time, it being understood that the measurement can vary considerably and randomly according to the particular questions being asked. blockquote 

 wikt:people People  and animals can also be tested for illnesses. For example, a blood test can be used to check for  disease .

Rarely, people use "tests" to check people's hearts. For instance, in a famous rap song, in Korea, the lyrics were about a boyfriend, telling his girlfriend, "I'm sorry, but I must tell you we have to break up. I do not love you, I have to tell you. Forgive me, but I have to tell you. It's all a test." - Many people accuse this theory as an "excuse to be offensive" or an "excuse to break up with his girlfriend", so it does not count very  logically  in the "test" page.

 Science 
In  science , tests are called  experiment s. These are done to check for a presence of a substance, or to check the quality of the thing being tested.

 Software 
In  software engineering , a test is used to determine a characteristic of a  software  system. Software is tested before it is released.  Alpha  testing is where software developers check the software for  Software bug bugs . Software can also be checked for quality and  usability .  Beta  testing is done by groups of users.

 Vehicles 
 Cars  and other vehicles are tested using a  crash test . The car is put under severe conditions to see what will make it fail. Other  machines  can also be crash tested. Crash test dummies stand in for humans. They 'sit' in the car seat to see if a human in the crash would have been injured or killed.

 Other 
The  River Test  is a chalk stream in the south of England. The river is used a lot for  trout   fishing . The river starts near Overton, in  Hampshire  and ends at the sea at the head of  Southampton  Water.

Sometimes, though perhaps not often,  police  officers use "tests" to find out  criminals , by measuring their  pulse  or  heartbeat  when asking questions. 

  References  
 references 

  Other websites  
 http://www.dtic.mil/get-tr-doc/pdf?AD=ADA514048 Tests and Experiments: Similarities and Differences 

 Category:Basic English 850 words