Product stewardship

simp date April 2012 

 Product stewardship  includes  waste disposal  measures in the  distribution  of an  industrial   Product (consumer goods) product .  That is, paying for the safe and proper disposal when you pay for the product, and relying on those who sold it to you, to dispose of it.  

The slightly more specific idea of  product take-back  means that the service of  waste disposal  is paid for at time of  wikt:purchase purchase .  It is often applied to  paint ,  tire s, and other goods that become  toxic waste  if not disposed of properly.  It is most familiar as the  deposit bottle  - where one pays for the  loan  of the bottle at the same time as one purchases what is inside it. The  container deposit  charged for a  deposit bottle  may be a  fee  to  buy  the bottle, separately from the fee to buy what it contains.  If one returns the bottle, the fee is returned, and the  supplier  must return the bottle for  re-use  or  recycling .  If not, one has paid the fee, and  presumably  this can pay for  landfill  or  litter  control measures that dispose of say a broken bottle.  Also, since the same fee can be collected by anyone finding and returning the bottle, it is common for people to collect these and return them as a means of surviving.  This is quite common for instance among  homeless  people.

 Legal   requirement s  vary :  the bottle itself may be considered simple  property  of the purchaser of the contents, or, the purchaser may have some  obligation  to return the bottle to some depot so it can be  recycling recycled  or re-used.   For the more toxic items, it is more likely that returning it is required:

This principle is applied very broadly beyond bottles to  paint  and  automobile  parts such as  tire s.  When purchasing paint or tires in many places, one simultaneously pays for the disposal of the  toxic waste  they become.  In some countries, such as  Germany ,  law  requires attention to the  comprehensive outcome  of the whole extraction, production, distribution, use and waste of a product, and holds those profiting from these legally responsible for any outcome along the way.  This is also the trend in the  UK  and  EU  generally.  In the  United States , there have been many  class action suit s that are effectively product stewardship  liability  - holding companies responsible for things the product does, which it was never advertised to do.

Rather than let liability for these problems be taken up by the  public sector  or be haphazardly  assign ed one  issue  at a time to companies via  lawsuit s, many  accounting reform  efforts focus on achieving  full cost accounting .  This is the  financial capital financial  reflection of the  comprehensive   outcome  - noting the gains and losses to all parties involved, not just those investing or purchasing.  Such moves have made  moral purchasing  more attractive, as it avoids  liability  and future lawsuits.

So these are  partial   implementation s of a  strict   service economy   ideal .

Those who  advocate  these measures are concerned with the later  phase s of  product lifecycle  and the  comprehensive outcome  of the whole production process.  It is considered a pre-requisite to a strict  service economy  interpretation of (fictional, national, legal) "commodity" and "product" relationships.

 Category:Business 
 Category:Ethics