Cooking

Image:Bakken.jpg thumb|Cooking food on a stove. 
 Cooking  is a process to make  food  ready to eat by  heat ing it. The place where people do it is a  kitchen . The heat can be made by  fire  using  wood  or  charcoal , with a  stove  that uses  propane  or  natural gas , or with a stove that uses  electricity . An  oven  is a part of a stove that is like a  box . People also build ovens out of  clay  or  brick s.

There are several different ways to cook food. We  Boiling boil  food by cooking it in water. We  Frying fry  food by cooking it in hot  butter ,  fat  or  oil . We  Baking bake  food by keeping it hot in an  oven . 
We  roast  or  grill  food by holding it over a hot fire.

People often cook  meat  by boiling, roasting or grilling it. People bake  bread . Some breads are  Frying fried .

Usually we cook the food in some kind of  pot  or  frying pan pan .  Sometimes people cook food by putting it directly into the fire, by wrapping the food in  leaves  before they put it into the fire, or holding it over a fire with a piece of wood.

Before foods are cooked, we say they are  raw . Some foods are good to eat raw.  Other foods are not good for the body when they are raw, so they must be cooked. Some foods are good to eat either raw or cooked and can be used in different recipes.

  Cooks  
 Image:Cooks 050918 154402.jpg thumb|Cooks at work. 
A person whose job it is to cook food may be called a  cook  or a  chef .  However, the word  cooker  means a  machine  or  tool  that a cook might use to cook food, such as a  rice  cooker. 

To many people, cooking is an art. To many other people, it is a job.
Cooking as an  art  is preparing the food so it tastes and looks really good.

There is a large  economy  for cooking in the world.  Restaurant s  hire  skilled cooks for amounts of  money  and  customer s pay for  meal s.

  Other websites  
 Commonscat 
 http://www.cyberend.com/homemaking/2003_recipe_spanishomelette.htm A recipe in Simple English 
 http://www.lovelyrecipes.com/cooking-tips.php Cooking tips and recipes 
 http://www.bestindiancuisines.com/best-vegetable-recipes.shtml Best Vegetable Recipes 
 http://www.cookthepart.com/ Cook the Part 

 wikibooks Cookbook 

 Category:Cooking   
 Category:Basic English 850 words