Animal

dablink For the album, see  Animals (album) . 
 Taxobox
  name   Animals
  image   Animalia diversity.jpg
  image_width   250px
  image_caption   Various animals
  domain    Eukaryota 
  regnum   Animalia
  subdivision_ranks    Phyla 
  subdivision  
   Subkingdom   Parazoa 
   Porifera 
   Placozoa 
   Subkingdom   Eumetazoa 
   Radiata   (unranked) 
   Ctenophora 
   Cnidaria 
  +  Trilobozoa 
   Bilateria   (unranked) 
   Orthonectida 
   Rhombozoa 
   Acoelomorpha 
   Myxozoa 
   Chaetognatha 
   Superphylum   Deuterostomia 
   Chordata  ( mammals ,  fish )
   Hemichordata 
   Echinodermata 
   Xenoturbellida 
   Protostomia   (unranked) 
   Kinorhyncha 
   Loricifera 
   Priapulida 
   Nematoda 
   Nematomorpha 
   Onychophora 
   Tardigrada 
   Arthropoda 
   Superphylum   Platyzoa 
   Platyhelminthes 
   Gastrotricha 
   Rotifera 
   Acanthocephala 
   Gnathostomulida 
   Micrognathozoa 
   Cycliophora 
   Superphylum   Lophotrochozoa 
   Sipuncula 
   Nemertea 
   Phoronida 
   Bryozoa 
   Entoprocta 
   Brachiopoda 
   Mollusca 
   Annelida 
   Echiura 

 Animals  are  opisthokont   eukaryotic   Organism organisms  with  Multicellular organism many cells . They do not use  light  to get  energy  as  plants  do. The study of animals is called  zoology . ref Ville C.A; Walker W.F. & Barnes R.D. 1984.  General zoology . Saunders ref ref Hamilton, Gina.  Kingdoms of life - Animals . Lorenz Educational Press. ISBN 978-1-4291-1610-7 ref  Animals use different ways to get energy from other living things. They usually eat other living things, but some are  parasitism parasites  or have  photosynthesis photosynthetic   protist s as  symbiosis symbionts .

Plants are also  multicellular  eukaryotic  organism s, but most animals are  motile mobile , meaning they can move around. Animals take in  oxygen , and give out  carbon dioxide . This  cellular respiration  is part of their  metabolism  (chemical working). In both these ways they are different from  plants . Also, the cells of animals have different  cell membrane s to other  eukaryotes  like plants and  fungi .

  Grouping animals  
There are many types of animals. The common animals most  people  know are only about 3% of the animal kingdom. When  biologists  look at animals, they find things that certain animals have in common. They use this to group the animals in a  biological classification . They think several million species exist but they have only identified about one million.

Animals can mainly be divided into two main groups: the  invertebrate s and the  vertebrate s. Vertebrates have a  backbone , or  spine ; invertebrates do not.

Vertebrates are:
 fish  (or 'fishes': both ways are correct)
 amphibian s
 reptile s
 bird s
 mammal s
Some invertebrates are:
 insect s
 spider s
 crustacean s
 mollusc s (like  squid )
 worm s
 jellyfish 

  Life styles  
The animal mode of  nutrition  is called  heterotroph ic because they get their food from other living organisms. Some animals eat only plants; they are called  herbivore s. Other animals eat only  meat  and are called  carnivore s. Animals that eat both plants and meat are called  omnivore s.

The  environments  animals live in vary greatly. By the process of  evolution , animals  Adaptation adapt  to the  habitats  they live in. A  fish  is adapted to its life in water and a  spider  is adapted to a life catching and eating insects. A  mammal  living on the  savannah s of  East Africa  lives quite a different life from a mammal like a  porpoise  catching fish in the sea.

The  fossil  record of animals goes back about 600 million years to the  Ediacaran  period, or somewhat earlier. ref cite journal title  Possible animal-body fossils in pre-Marinoan limestones from South Australia  journal  Nature Geoscience   volume  3   pages  653-659  url   http://www.nature.com/ngeo/journal/v3/n9/full/ngeo934.html   doi 10.1038/ngeo934   issue  9 bibcode   2010NatGe...3..653M last1  Maloof, Adam C.  et al  2010   http://www.princeton.edu/geosciences/people/maloof/papers_pub/24Maloof.pdf Pdf . These fossils are interpreted as being early sponges. They were found in 665-million-year-old rock. ref  During the whole of this long time, animals have been constantly  evolving , so that the animals alive on  Earth  today are very different from those on the edges of the sea-floor in the Ediacaran. The study of ancient life is called  palaeontology .

  Related pages  
 wikispecies Animalia 
   List of animal phyla 

  References  
 reflist 

 Category:Animals 
 Category:Basic English 850 words