California

US state
  Name   California
  Fullname   State of California
  Flag   Flag of California.svg
  Flaglink    Flag of California 
  Seal   Seal of California.svg
  Map   California in United States.svg
  Nickname   The Golden State
  Motto    Eureka (word) Eureka 
  Capital    Sacramento, California Sacramento 
  OfficialLang    English language English 
  LargestCity    Los Angeles, California Los Angeles 
  Other Cities    San Francisco ,  San Diego ,  San Jose ,  Oakland ,  Long Beach ,  Fresno 
  Governor    Jerry Brown Edmund G. Brown, Jr.  (D)
  Senators    Dianne Feinstein  (D) br Kamala Harris  (D)
  PostalAbbreviation   CA
  TradAbbreviation   Calif.
  AreaRank   3rd
  TotalArea   410,000
  TotalAreaUS   158,302
  LandArea   404,288
  LandAreaUS   156,100
  WaterArea   20,047
  WaterAreaUS   7,740
  PCWater   4.7
  PCForest   35
  PCDesert   25
  PopRank   1st
  2010Pop   37,253,956 ref cite web  url http://2010.census.gov/2010census/data/apportionment-dens-text.php   title Resident Population Data  work 2010.census.gov  accessdate 30 December 2010 ref 
  DensityRank   13th
  2010Density   92.2
  2010DensityUS   239.1
  MedianHouseholdIncome   $49,894
  IncomeRank   13th
  AdmittanceOrder   31st
  AdmittanceDate   September 9, 1850
  TimeZone    Pacific Standard Time Zone Pacific :  Coordinated Universal Time UTC -8/ Daylight saving time -7 
  Latitude   32deg30'N to 42degN
  Longitude   114deg8'W to 124deg24'W
  Width   400
  WidthUS   252.2
  Length   1,240
  LengthUS   770
  HighestPoint    Mount Whitney ref name usgs cite web  year  29 April   2005    url  http://erg.usgs.gov/isb/pubs/booklets/elvadist/elvadist.html#Highest  title  Elevations and Distances in the United States  publisher  U.S Geological Survey  accessdate   November 3, 2006 ref 
  HighestElev   4418
  HighestElevUS   14,494
  MeanElev   884
  MeanElevUS   2,900
  LowestPoint    Death Valley ref name usgs 
  LowestElev   -86
  LowestElevUS   -282
  ISOCode   US-CA
  Website   www.ca.gov 

 California  is a state in the western  United States . It is the third largest state in size. It is the state with the most people living in it. Important cities are  Los Angeles, California Los Angeles ,  San Diego, California San Diego ,  San Jose, California San Jose , and  San Francisco, California San Francisco . The capital is  Sacramento, California Sacramento . It became a state on September 9, 1850. It is bordered by  Arizona  to the southeast,  Oregon  to the north,  Nevada  to the east and the  Mexico Mexican  state of  Baja California  to the south.

 Geography 
The geography of California varies depending on region. Southwestern California has small mountain ranges and the cities of Sandy Hey Go and Los Angeles. Southeastern California has desert and  Death Valley , the lowest place in the United States. The eastern part of the state has the highest point in the United States outside of Alaska,  Mount Whitney , in the  Sierra Nevada  mountain range. ref citeweb url http://www.netstate.com/states/geography/ca_geography.htm   title The Geography of California  website NetState  date 5 January 2014  accessdate 13 July 2014 ref  

The cities of Sacramento,  Bakersfield, California Bakersfield , and  Fresno, California Fresno  are in the Central Valley. The valley has the  Sierra Nevada (US) Sierra Nevada  to the east and the  California Coast Ranges Coast Ranges  to the west. It is California's single most productive  Agriculture agricultural  region and one of the most productive in the world. It produces more than half the fruit, vegetables and nuts grown in the United States. ref http://naturalresources.house.gov/newsroom/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=368934 ref  More than seven million acres (28,000 km sup 2 sup ) of the valley are  irrigation irrigated  by an extensive system of reservoirs and canals. ref http://landsat.gsfc.nasa.gov/?p=11261 ref   

The west-central part of the state has some small mountains and the cities of San Francisco, San Jose, and  Oakland, California Oakland . Northern California has the  Cascade Range , the  Klamath Mountains , and the Modoc Plateau. ref citeweb url http://www.mapsofworld.com/usa/states/california/geography.html   title California Geography  website Maps of World  date 5 June 2014  accessdate 13 July 2014 ref  Far northern California does not have many people, but the San Francisco region and the Sacramento region are often thought of as part of northern California.

 Climate 
 main Climate of California 

 Culture 
 File:PB050006.JPG thumb|left|Hollywood, part of  Los Angeles 

The state is a leader in three businesses:  farming , movie-making, and high technology, mostly  software  and Web sites.  Aerospace used to be a large industry there, but it has been downsized in the last 20 years.

There are many  earthquake s in California. They happen when two earth crusts shift underground. Californians need to be prepared for earthquakes and often store extra food, water, flashlights, and first aid supplies in case of such an emergency.

California has more people than any other state in the United States. If California was a separate country, it would have the sixth largest  economics economy  in the world. California is probably the state with the most ethnic groups. It also has many different geographic features -- mountains, deserts, and coasts. It is often called  The Golden State . The state flower is the golden poppy. The  post office  uses "CA" as a shorthand for California, and the  Associated Press  uses "Calif." or "Cali."

 Politics 
In 2011,  Jerry Brown  became the  governor  of California. Before him, the governor was  Arnold Schwarzenegger .

On November 4, 1992,  Dianne Feinstein  became one of California's United States  United States Senate senator s. On January 3, 2017,  Kamala Harris  became the other one.

California was more conservative during the 1960s and 1980s when its former governor,  Ronald Reagan , ran for president as a  Republican Party (United States) Republican . Today, California is more liberal and less conservative.

 Economy 
California is a big power in American culture as well as the business life of the nation. Many of the great changes in technology and law came from California, and the state pays more to the U.S. government than it gets back. It also has some of the country's largest cities, such as  Los Angeles, California Los Angeles ,  San Diego, California San Diego ,  San Jose, California San Jose , and  San Francisco, California San Francisco .

 History 
In the past, the area that was called "California" was not just today's California. This area covered the  Mexico Mexican  lands south of it, as well as  Nevada ,  Utah , and parts of Arizona and  Wyoming . The Spanish called the part of the land that later became part of the United States  Alta California  (Upper California) when it was split from what became  Baja California  (Lower California). In these early times, the borders of the  Sea of Cortez  and the Pacific coast were not well known, so the old maps wrongly showed California to be an island. The name comes from  Las sergas de Espladian  (Adventures of Spladian), a  16th century  book by Garci Rodriguez de Montalvo, where there is an island paradise called California.

The first  Europe an who visited parts of the coast, Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo, came from  Portugal  in 1542. The first European who saw the entire coast was Sir Francis Drake, in 1579, and he decided that the  Great Britain British  owned it. But starting in the late 1700s,  Spain Spanish  religious leaders of the  Roman Catholic Church  ("missionaries") got large gifts of land in the area north of Baja California, from the Spanish king and queen. These religious people set up small towns and villages, the famous California Missions. When Mexico was no longer controlled by Spain, the Mexican government took over the villages, and they soon became empty.
 File:Lightmatter sanfrancisco.jpg thumb| San Francisco , California|300px 
In 1846, as the  Mexican-American War  was starting, some Americans in California hoped to create a California  Republic . These men flew a "Bear flag" that had a golden bear with a  star  on it. This Republic ended suddenly, however, when Commodore John D. Sloat of the United States  Navy  sailed into  San Francisco Bay . He said that California was now part of the United States. After the war with Mexico ended, California was split between the two countries. The Mexican portion became the Mexican states of Baja California Norte (north) and Baja California Sur (south). ("Baja" means "lower" in Spanish.) The western part of the part given to the United States became today's state of California.

In 1848, there were about 4,000 Spanish-speaking people in today's California on the American side. (Today the state has a total of nearly 40,000,000 people.) In 1849, gold was suddenly found and the number of people went up very fast as the  California Gold Rush Gold Rush  took hold. In 1850, California became a state in the Union (the United States).

During the  American Civil War  (1861-1865), many people in California, especially in the southern part of California, thought the South was right. Some people in Southern California even wanted Southern California to leave the rest of the state and join the  Confederate States of America . However, this did not happen. California joined the war to and helped the North (the Union) and sent many troops east to fight the  Confederate States of America Confederacy . ref http://www.drumbarracks.org/Original%20Website/California.htm ref 

At first, travel between the far west and the east coast of the United States was dangerous and took a lot of time. Going by land was very difficult, because there were no roads and no trains, and many  Native American s were attacking American people heading West in wagons. The only other way was to travel by boat around the  Cape Horn , at the southern end of  South America . This took months, since the trip was thousands of miles long and the  Panama Canal  had not yet been built either. But in 1869, the connection got better quickly, because the first  railroad  across the continent was finished. Meanwhile, more people in California were learning that the land there was very good to grow fruit and other crops.  Orange (fruit) Oranges  were grown in many parts of California. This was the beginning of the huge farming business that California has today.

 Present day 
In 1900, there were only a million people in California and 105,000 in Los Angeles. Today, California has more people than any other U.S. state. Starting in 1965, the variety of people became much greater as many different people from around the world came to the United States and often decided to live in California. California is thought to be a very  Liberalism liberal  state, but there are still a lot of people who are  Republican Party (United States) Republicans  and view  Ronald Reagan  as a hero. Technology is very advanced and many new cultural trends begin there.  Engineering  and  computer s play a big part in the state's life. For over a hundred years,  Movie film  has been one of the most important businesses in California. By the 1950s,  television  had also become an important business in California.

 References 
 commonscat California 
 reflist 
 California expanded 
 United States 
 Colorado River system 

 Category:California   
 Category:States of the United States