Quebec

wikify date October 2012 
 File:Carte du Quebec au sein du Canada.svg thumb|right|Quebec (in orange) in Canada (in light yellow) 
 Quebec  (spelled  Quebec  in French) is a  province  in Eastern  Canada . It is the largest of  Provinces and territories of Canada Canada's ten provinces  by  size . It also has the second-highest  population number of people , after  Ontario . Most of Quebec's inhabitants live along or close to the banks of the  Saint Lawrence River . Not many people live in the north part of the province. 

Unlike the other provinces, most people in Quebec speak  French language French  ( Canadian French ) and French is the only  official language . There is a strong French-language  culture , which includes French-language  newspaper s,  magazine s,  movie s,  television  and  radio  shows. Their culture and language, though, is different from that of  France  mainly because of  anglicisation , having words that come from the larger  Canadian English English-speaking  parts of Canada.

The  government  of Quebec has its offices in the  Capital (city) capital ,  Quebec City , which is one of the oldest cities in  North America . But the largest city in the province is  Montreal , which is also the second-largest city in all of Canada.

Quebec has many  natural resource natural resources  that are used to create  job s. Quebec also has many  company companies  that create products for  Information technology information  and  communication  technologies,  Aerospace engineering aerospace ,  biotechnology , and  Health care health   Industrialization industries . It has also developed close relations with the  Northeastern United States .

  Leaving Canada  
Quebec was part of  New France  until 1760, then under  British Empire British control . Quebec became a province in the Canadian Confederation in 1867. Since then, some people in Quebec have wanted to leave Canada. Since Quebec is a mainly French-speaking province, most of the people there feel that it is very different from the rest of Canada, and want to keep it that way. Some feel that for this to happen, Quebec must  Succession leave Canada  and become its own  country . However, the people of Quebec are still divided as to its place in Canada. 

Quebec held  Democracy democratic   vote votes  in 1980 and 1995 to decide whether to leave Canada. In 1995, the people of Quebec chose to stay in Canada by a 1% margin.

  History of Quebec  
 Indigenous peoples Aboriginal  people and  Inuit  groups were the first peoples who lived in what is now Quebec. These Aboriginal people lived by hunting, gathering, and fishing. Some of the Aboriginal people, called  Iroquoian Iroquoians , planted squash and  maize . The Inuit fished and  whaler hunted whales  and seals for fur and food. Sometimes they  war warred  with each other.

 Viking Vikings  came in  longboat longboats  from  Scandinavia  in 1000 AD.  Basque Country (greater region) Basque  whalers and fishermen traded furs with Aboriginal people throughout the 1500s.

The first  France French  explorer to reach Quebec was  Jacques Cartier . He sailed into the St. Lawrence River in 1534 and established a  colony  near present-day Quebec City.

 Samuel de Champlain  came from France and traveled into the St. Lawrence River. In 1608, he founded Quebec City as a permanent fur trading outpost. Champlain signed trading and military agreements with the Aboriginal people. Voyageurs, coureurs des bois, and  Catholicism Catholic   Missionary missionaries  used river  canoe canoes  to explore the interior of the North American continent. 

After 1627,  Louis XIII of France King Louis XIII of France  made a rule that only  Roman Catholicism Roman Catholics  could go to live in New France.  Jesuit   cleric clerics  tried to  Religious conversion convert  New France's Aboriginal people to Catholicism. New France became a Royal Province of France in 1663. The  population  grew from about 3,000 to 60,000 people between 1666 and 1760. Colonists built farms on the banks of St. Lawrence River.

In 1753 France began building a series of forts in the British  Ohio  Country. Britain asked the French to remove the forts, and the French refused. By 1756, France and Britain were at war. In 1758, the British attacked New France by sea and captured the French fort at Louisbourg.

In 1759, British General James Wolfe defeated General Louis-Joseph de Montcalm outside Quebec City. France gave its North American land to Great Britain in 1763. In 1764, New France was renamed the Province of Quebec.

In 1774, the  Parliament of the United Kingdom British Parliament  passed the Quebec Act, giving recognition to French law,  Roman Catholicism in Canada Catholic religion , and French language in the colony. The Quebec Act gave the Quebec people their first Charter of  rights . The Quebec Act made American colonists angry, so they launched the  American Revolution . A 1775  invasion  by the  Continental Army American Continental Army  was stopped at Quebec City. In 1783, Quebec gave the territory south of the  Great Lakes  to the new United States of America. In 1867 the Parliament of the United Kingdom passed the British North America Act, which brought most of the provinces together.

  Quiet Revolution  
The  conservative  government of Maurice Duplessis dominated Quebec  politics  from 1944 to 1960 with the support of the Catholic Church. The Quiet Revolution was a period of social and political change. During the Quiet Revolution, English Canadians lost their control over the Quebec  economy , the Roman Catholic Church became less important, and the Quebec government took over the  Hydroelectricity hydro-electric  companies.

In 1963, a  terrorist  group that became known as the Front de Liberation du Quebec (FLQ) began doing  Bombing bombings ,  Robbery robberies  and attacks on government offices. In 1970 the FLQ kidnapped  James Cross , the British trade commissioner to Canada. The FLQ also  Kidnapping kidnapped  and  assassination assassinated   Pierre Laporte , Minister of Labour and Deputy Premier of Quebec. Laporte's body was found in the trunk of  Paul Rose 's car, on the South Shore of Montreal on October 17 1970.  Prime Minister of Canada Prime Minister  Pierre Trudeau invoked the War Measures Act, and 497 people were arrested.

The Quiet Revolution was so named because it was not marked by  protest protests  or violence.

In 1977, the newly elected  Parti Quebecois  government of  Rene Levesque  introduced the Charter of the French Language. Often known as Bill 101, it defined French as the only official language of Quebec. 

 Government 
The government is based in the provincial capital,  Quebec City . The government is led by a lieutenant-governor (pronounced "lef-") who represents the Crown. As of 2014, he is  Pierre Duchesne . The political leader of the province is the premier. He is  Philippe Couillard  of the Quebec Liberal Party (PLQ), elected in 2014.

 Provinces and territories of Canada 

 Category:Quebec  