Capital city

see also List of national capitals 
 File:Great_Hall_Of_The_People_At_Night.JPG thumb|444px| Beijing , the capital of  China , is the largest capital in the world. 

A  capital city  (or  capital town  or just  capital ) is a  city  or  town , specified by  law  or  constitution , by the  government  of a  country , or part of a country, such as a  state ,  province  or  county . It usually serves as the location of the government's central  meeting  place and  office s. Most of the country's  leader s and  official s work in the capital city.

  Size  
Capitals are usually among the largest cities in their regions. For example,  Montevideo  is  Uruguay 's capital as well as its biggest city. If a capital city is much bigger than a nation's second city, like  Bangkok  in  Thailand , it can be considered a  :en:primate city primate city .

However, a capital is not always the largest city in a country. For example, the capital of the  India  is  New Delhi , which is smaller than  Mumbai , the largest city; and the capital of  Pakistan  is  Islamabad , which is smaller than  Karachi . Also, in countries with subdivisions like the  United States , the capital cities or towns of the federated states are often not the largest or most populated town. For example,  Albany, New York Albany  is capital of  New York , not  New York City .

An unusual case exists in  Canada ; the federal capital,  Ottawa , is not the largest city in its province,  Ontario , which is  Toronto . But Toronto happens to be the capital of the province of Ontario. This way, Toronto is both a capital and a non-capital, depending on how you see it, as a city in a country or part of it.

  Number  
Some countries have more than one capital, often for different purposes, like  Bolivia , which has two (Sucre and  La Paz ); and  South Africa , which has three ( Pretoria ,  Cape Town , and  Bloemfontein ). Some countries treat their capitals as if it was the country itself, like  Monaco , the  Vatican City , and  city-state s like  Singapore .

Not all countries have capitals.  Nauru  is a country that does not officially have a capital, but the district of  Yaren , which is where the government is, can be called the  de facto  capital. Also, although many people consider the city of  Bern  in  Switzerland  to be the capital of the country, it is in fact not the case by law, but has the status of " :en:federal city federal city " by the government which is based there.

  Location  
Capitals can be in cities that are already there like  London ,  United Kingdom  (as early as the 12th century), or new cities can be built and made the capital like  Canberra ,  Australia , as the  Australian Capital Territory .

Countries can change capitals from time to time. The  United States  once had its capital in  Philadelphia , but moved to  Washington, D.C.  in 1800. Because of this, a town can lose its capital status. For example, this happened with  Rio de Janeiro  in  Brazil , when  Brasilia  was built between 1956 and 1960.

  Seat of government  
Most countries have their seat of government within their capital city, though some do not.  Malaysia  has their capital at  Kuala Lumpur  but their seat of government is at  Putrajaya . In the  Netherlands , the  constitution  says that  Amsterdam  is the  de jure  capital, but the government is in  The Hague .

 commonscat Capitals 

 Category:Capital cities