Beijing

one source date July 2014 
 File:Beijing in China (+all claims hatched).svg thumb|Beijing in China 
 File:Beijing Financial Street (overlook).jpg thumb|Beijing 

 Beijing  ( lang-zh Bei Jing  , Beijing) is the  Capital (city) capital  of the  People's Republic of China . The city used to be known as  Peking .  It is in the northern and eastern parts of the country.

The city of Beijing has played a very important role in the development of China. Many people from different cities and countries come to Beijing to look for better chances to find work. Nearly 15 million people live there. In 2008 Beijing hosted the  Summer Olympic Games , and will host the 2022  Winter Olympic Games . It will be the only city to host both.

Beijing is well known for its ancient history.  Since the  Jin Dynasty , Beijing has been the  Capital (city) capital  of several  dynasties  (especially the later ones), including the Yuan, Ming, and Qing. There are many places of historic interest in Beijing.  These places include the  Summer Palace  (Yiheyuan), the Temple of Heaven (Tiantan),  Tiananmen Square  (Tiananmen Guangchang), the  Forbidden City  (Zijincheng), and the  Great Wall of China  (Changcheng).

  What This Means 
Beijing simply means "the northern capital" in the  Chinese language .  It was once a counterpart of  Nanjing , "the southern capital", during the Ming Dynasty.  This dynasty gave Beijing its name.  When the city did not serve as the capital city, the city reverts to its original name of Beiping, "northern peace"; this occurred between 1928 and 1949 when Nanjing was the capital of the Republic of China.

  History  
The center of Beijing was settled in the  1st millennium BC . In those days, the Kingdom of Yan (Yan , Yan) set up their capital where Beijing is today. ref name CD History citeweb url http://www.city-data.com/world-cities/Beijing-History.html   title History - Beijing  accessdate 23 July 2014 ref  They called it Ji (Ji , Ji). After the Kingdom of Yan was destroyed, the city became smaller, although it was still an important place.

Beijing became more important again in the 10th century, when the Jin dynasty set its capital there. This city was destroyed by  Mongol  forces in  1215 .  Then in  1267 , Mongols built a new city on the north side of the Jin capital, and called it "Great Capital" (Da Du , Dadu), which was the beginning of modern Beijing. When  Kublai Khan  the Mongolian monarch, set up the Yuan dynasty, this city became his capital.

The  Yuan Dynasty ,  Ming Dynasty  and  Qing dynasty  all made Beijing their capital. When the Qing dynasty lost power and the Republic of China was set up, the new Republic moved its capital from Beijing to Nanjing. When the People's Republic of China seized power, Beijing became the capital of China again.

In 1989, there were  protest s in  Tiananmen Square Tian'anmen Square  because some people wanted  democracy . ref name CD History 

  Education  
Beijing is the education center of People's Republic of China. More than 500 famous universities of China are in Beijing.  They also include 5 of the top universities:  Peking University , Tsinghua University, China People University, Beijing Normal University, and Beihang University. Beijing is also education center of China for teaching Chinese as a foreign language. The standard Chinese pronunciation is based on Beijing dialect, so over 70% foreigners who want to study Chinese go to Beijing for their studies.

 References 
 reflist 

  Other websites  
 wiktionary Beijing 
   http://www.chinatravel.com/beijing/ Beijing Travel 
   http://www.chinahighlights.com/beijing/ Beijing Travel Guide 
   http://www.voyageschine.com/p%C3%A9kin-voyage/ Voyage Pekin 
   http://www.accesschinatravel.com/photos-beijing.html Photos of Beijing 

 commons 
 Major cities of Greater China 

 Category:Beijing   
 Category:Olympic cities