Sabbath in Christianity

About the Christian day of rest the Jewish day of rest Shabbat 
 Sabbath  in Christianity is the day of rest and service to God.  The idea of the Sabbath in Christianity comes directly from the idea
of the Sabbath (or  Shabbat ) in Judaism.  In fact, the word Sabbath itself comes from the Hebrew word  Shabbat.   Like the Jewish Sabbath (Shabbat), the Sabbath in Christianity comes from the  Genesis  story of  Creationism Creation . ref bibleverse Genesis 2:1-3 HE ref   But unlike Jews, most Christians have Sabbath on  Sunday , not  Saturday . They also rest, but not the same way as Jews. The exact way depends on the church  Religious denomination denomination . 

 Differing views 
 complex 1 section date May 2013 
Most  Christians  honor the Sabbath on Sunday to remember the  Resurrection  of Jesus on the first day of the week on the Jewish calendar. They say that there is an  analogy  between the obligation of the Christian day of worship and the Sabbath-day ordinance. These two rules are not literally identical though. They say that this ordinance is no longer valid, because God has replaced his old creation by a new one. ref bibleverse 2 Corinthians 5:17 ref  For this reason, the obligation to keep the Sabbath is not the same for Christians as for Jews. They say there are examples in the New Testament, and in other writings surviving from the first few centuries. 

Some conservative Christians are "Sabbatarians". Most of these follow the  Reformation Reformed  traditions. Sabbatarians think the first day of the week or  Lord's Day  is the new Sabbath. This is because the 4th commandment has never been revoked and Sabbath-keeping is in any case a creation ordinance. 

Still others believe that the Sabbath remains as a day of rest on the Saturday, reserving Sunday as a day of worship. In reference to Acts 20:7, the disciples came together on the first day of the week (Sunday) to break bread and to hear the preaching of the apostle Paul. This is not the first time Christians assembled together on a Sunday; Jesus appeared to the Christians on the "first day of the week" while they were in hiding. One can maintain this argument in that Jesus himself maintained the Sabbath, although not within the restrictions that were mandated by Jewish traditions;  the Pharisees often tried Jesus by asking him if certain tasks were acceptable according to the Law. ref bibleverse Luke 14:5 ref  This would seem to show that while the Sabbath was still of importance to the Jews, Sunday was a separate day for worship and teaching from Scriptures.

The  Seventh-day Adventist Church Seventh-day Adventists  and other churches disagree with some of these views. They argue that the custom of meeting for worship on Sunday originated in  paganism , specifically  Sol Invictus  and Mithraism (in which  sun   god  worship took place on Sunday) fact date December 2012 . This is therefore an explicit rejection of the commandment to keep the  seventh  day holy. Instead, they keep Saturday as the Sabbath as a memorial to God's work of creation ref bibleverse Genesis 2:1-3 9 ,  bibleverse Exodus 20:8-11 9 ,  bibleverse Exodus 16:23,29-30 9 ref  believing that none of the Ten Commandments can ever be destroyed. ref bibleverse Matthew 5:17-19 9 ,  bibleverse Exodus 31:16 9 ref  Seventh-day Sabbatarians claim that the seventh day Sabbath was kept by the majority of Christian groups until the  2nd century 2nd  and  3rd century , by most until the 4th and 5th century, and a few thereafter, but because of opposition to Judaism after the  Jewish-Roman wars , the original custom was gradually replaced by Sunday as the day of worship. The history of these changes is certainly not altogether lost regardless of any belief in a suppression of the facts by a conspiracy of the pagans of the  Roman Empire  and the clergy of the Catholic Church. 

Jews had come to be hated in the Roman Empire after the  Jewish-Roman wars . This led to the criminalization of the Jewish Sabbath. Hatred of Jews is apparent in the  Council of Laodicea  (4th Century AD) where Canon 37-38 states: "It is not lawful to receive portions sent from the feasts of Jews or heretics, nor to feast together with them." and "It is not lawful to receive unleavened bread from the Jews, nor to be partakers of their impiety."  http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/3806.htm  In keeping with this rejection of the Jews, this Roman council also criminalized the Jewish Sabbath as can be seen in Canon 29 of the Council Laodicea: "Christians must not Judaize by resting on the Sabbath, but must work on that day, rather honoring the Lord's Day; and, if they can, resting then as Christians. But if any shall be found to be  judaizers , let them be  excommunication excommunicated  from Christ." ref cite web url http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/3806.htm title Website of the New Adventist Church ref 

In the  Gospel of Mark  2:28  Jesus  says 'the  Son of God Son of Man  is lord even of the sabbath'.

 References 
 reflist 

 Category:Christian holidays