Political party

A  political party  is an organized group of voters. It often puts forward candidates for  public office . In a  democracy , leaders must "run for office" in an  election . In a  dictatorship , there is generally only one party allowed, that can approve a new leader without non-members having a choice. 

  About  
A political party is similar to a  Political faction faction , and can be the same thing. In some systems, members of one party in the  legislature  are all expected to vote the same way. The laws written by the party or faction with the majority of votes become adopted by the country, so this means whatever party is elected to over half the seats, gets to run the government. The next largest party is often called the "opposition". Sometimes when there are more than two parties with seats, no one party has over half of the seats. Then two or more parties might join together to form what is called a "coalition".

Some parties are formed around a single issue or interest group. Others form policies to address all matters of government, known as a "platform".

Many political parties have a set of ideas and beliefs (called its " ideology "). People often describe these ideologies using words such as "rightwing" and "leftwing". 

Common ideologies include  environmentalism ,  socialism  (ranging from  social democracy  to  Marxism  and  Communism ),  conservatism ,  democracy ,  liberalism , and  nationalism .

  The law  

Political parties can be against the law in some places. When some parties get a lot of  Influence power , they can make all other political parties illegal. For example, the  Nazi Party  did this in  Germany , and the  Communist  Party did it in several countries. Some countries make extreme-right parties illegal (such as  Vlaams Blok  in Belgium). At other times, countries have outlawed far-left parties. For example,  West Germany  banned the Communist Party in 1956.

A handful of countries like  China ,  North Korea  and  Cuba  still have one-party dictatorships. In a few other dictatorships, such as  Saudi Arabia , all political parties are banned and there is no parliament at all.

  Importance in all big democracies  

In all big democratic countries, parties are very important. But there are a few very small countries, such as the island of  Jersey , where most politicians do not belong to any party and where parties do not matter much.

In some democracies, there are only two big political parties. For example, in the United States, there is the  Democratic Party (United States) Democratic Party  and the  Republican Party (United States) Republican Party . Some other parties exist but are very small and do not hold seats in Congress.

In other countries there are larger numbers of parties. In the German federal Parliament (or Bundestag), six parties have seats. In the United Kingdom, there are two big parties, one medium-sized party, and many small ones.

  Parties in each country  

   List of political parties in Australia 
   List of political parties in Canada 
   List of political parties in France 
   List of political parties in Germany 
   List of political parties in Hong Kong 
   List of political parties in Malaysia 
   List of political parties in New Zealand 
   List of political parties in Singapore 
   List of political parties in the United Kingdom 
   List of political parties in the United States 

 Category:Political parties  