Legislature

Legislature  is a word that comes from the  Latin  language, meaning "those who write the  law s." The legislature of a  state  or country is a group of people, each of whom got his or her office either by winning an  election  or by being appointed, to vote for the best laws. The way a legislature is supposed to work can usually be found in the  constitution  of that state or country.

In many countries, the legislature is called a  Parliament ,  Congress  or  National Assembly  etc. Sometimes the legislature is made up of two separate houses. This is called a " bicameralism bicameral " legislature. Whereas a unicameral legislature consists of only one chamber or legislative house.

A  county ,  district ,  city , or other small area also has a  council , that makes the rules and laws for its level of government. The way a council works can usually be found in the area's  charter .

 File:Unibicameral Map.png 400px|thumb| legend #38b4d8 Nations with bicameral legislatures. legend #f09c30 Nations with unicameral legislatures. {{legend|#a0989f|No legislature.}ii} 

  List of titles of legislatures  
  National  
   Parliament 
   Congress 
   Diet (assembly) Diet 
   National Assembly 
   Althing  --  Iceland 
   Assembly of the Republic (Portugal) Assembleia da Republica  --  Portugal 
   Bundestag  --  Germany 
   Riksdag  --  Sweden 
   Cortes Generales  --  Spain 
   Eduskunta  --  Finland 
   Federal Assembly  --  Russia ,  Switzerland 
   Folketing  --  Denmark 
   Stortinget  --  Norway 
   Knesset  --  Israel 
   Assembly of Albania  --  Albania 
   Legislative Yuan  --  Republic of China Republic of China/Taiwan 
   moganane  --  Iran fact date April 2009 

  Sub-National  
   List of state legislatures of the United States  --  United States 
  General Assembly / Assembly
  Great and General Court / General Court
  House of Delegates
   Landtag  --  Germany ,  Austria 
   Legislative Assemblies of Canada's provinces and territories Canada 
  Legislative Assembly -- All  Provinces and territories of Canada provinces and territories  except:
  National Assembly --  Quebec 
  House of Assembly --  Nova Scotia  and  Newfoundland and Labrador 
   Parliaments of the Australian states and territories Australia 
  Legislative Assembly - All States and Territories except:
  House of Assembly -  South Australia  and  Tasmania 
  Legislative Council - All  States  except  Queensland Legislative Council Queensland 
   United Kingdom 
   Scottish Parliament  --  Scotland 
   Northern Ireland Assembly  --  Northern Ireland 
   National Assembly for Wales  --  Wales 


 Category:Legislatures  