Music

File:Music lesson Staatliche Antikensammlungen 2421.jpg thumb|right|250px|A painting on an Ancient Greek  vase  shows a music lesson (about 510 BC) 
 File:Louis Armstrong NYWTS.jpg thumb|250px| Louis Armstrong ,  jazz  musician. 
 File:Estonian National Symphony Orchestra (ERSO) in Stockholm, 2008.jpg thumb|right|250px|The  Estonia n Symphony Orchestra in  Stockholm , 2008 
 File:Paco de Lucena.jpg thumb|right|250px|Paco de Lucena, 19th century  Spain Spanish   Roma people gypsy   flamenco   guitar ist 

 Music  is a form of art. Music is also a form of  entertainment  that puts  sound s together in a way that people like or find interesting. Most music includes people  singing  with their voices or playing  musical instrument s, such as the  piano ,  guitar , or  drum s.

The word  music  comes from the  Greek language Greek  word  mousike  ( mousike ), which means "(art) of the Muses". In  Ancient Greece  the  Muse s included the  god desses of music,  poetry ,  art , and  dance . Someone who makes music is known as a  musician .

  What is music?  
Music is sound that has been organized by using  rhythm ,  melody  or  harmony . If someone bangs saucepans while  cooking , it makes noise. If a person bangs saucepans or pots in a rhythmic way, they are making a simple type of music.

There are four things which music has most of the time:
  Music often has  pitch (music) pitch . This means high and low  note (music) notes .  Tune s are made of notes that go up or down or stay on the same pitch.
  Music often has  rhythm . Rhythm is the way the musical sounds and silences are put together in a sequence. Every tune has a rhythm that can be tapped. Music usually has a regular beat.
  Music often has  dynamics (music) dynamics . This means whether it is quiet or loud or somewhere in between.
  Music often has  timbre . This is a French word (pronounced the French way: "TAM-br"). The "timbre" of a sound is the way that a sound is interesting. The sort of sound might be harsh, gentle, dry, warm, or something else. Timbre is what makes a  clarinet  sound different from an  oboe , and what makes one person's  voice  sound different from another person.

  Definitions  
There is no simple definition of music which covers all cases. It is an art form, and  opinion s come into play. Music is whatever people think is music. A different approach is to list the qualities music must have, such as, sound which has rhythm, melody, pitch, timbre, etc.

These and other attempts, do not capture all aspects of music, or leave out examples which definitely are music. According to Thomas Clifton, music is "a certain reciprocal relation established between a person, his  behavior , and a sounding object". ref name Clifton Clifton, Thomas. 1983. Music as heard: a study in applied phenomenology. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-02091-0 ref sup p10 sup  Musical experience and the music, together, are called  phenomenon phenomena , and the activity of describing phenomena is called  phenomenology .

  History  
 File:Maler der Grabkammer des Nacht 004.jpg thumb|230px|Musicians of  Amun , Tomb of  Nakht, 18th Dynasty, Western  Thebes, Egypt Thebes 

Even in the  stone age  people made music. The first music was probably made trying to imitate sounds and rhythms that occurred naturally. Human music may echo these  phenomenon phenomena  using  pattern s,  repetition  and  tonality . This kind of music is still here today.  Shamanism Shamans  sometimes imitate sounds that are heard in  nature . ref name onom http://dasa.baua.de/nn_35984/sid_2C8A99B3F31A58C62BBE3312986DC568/nsc_true/de/Presse/Pressematerialien/Sonderausstellung_20Macht_20Musik/Schamanen-Musik.pdf  Hoppal 2006: 143 ref ref name soy Dioszegi 1960: 203 ref  It may also serve as  entertainment  (games), ref name Nattiez Nattiez, Jean-Jacques. 1990.  Music and discourse: toward a semiology of music . Translated by Carolyn Abbate. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-09136-6 ref ref name desch http://www.mustrad.org.uk/articles/inuit.htm Deschenes 2002 ref  or have practical uses, like  lure luring  animals when  hunting . ref name Nattiez 

Some animals also can use music.  Songbird s use  song  to  wikt:simple:protect protect  their  territory , or to attract a  mate .  Monkey s have been seen beating hollow logs. This may, of course, also serve to defend the territory.

The first musical instrument used by humans was probably the  voice . The human voice can make many different kinds of sounds. The  larynx  (voice box) is like a  wind instruments wind instrument .

The oldest known  Neanderthal   hyoid  bone with the modern human form was found in 1983, ref cite journal   author   B. Arensburg A.M.  Tillier B. Vandermeersch H. Duday L.A. Schepartz & Y. Rak   year   1989   month   April   title   A Middle Palaeolithic human hyoid bone   journal   Nature   issue    338   pages   758-760   doi   10.1038/338758a0   volume   338 ref  indicating that the Neanderthals had language, because the hyoid supports the voice box in the human throat. ref McClarnon A.M. & Hewitt G.P. 1999. The evolution of human speech: the role of enhanced breathing control.  Am. J. Phys. Anthropology   109 , 341-363  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10407464 ref 

Most likely the first  rhythm  instruments or  percussion instruments  involved the  clapping  of hands, stones hit together, or other things that are useful to keep a beat. There are finds of this type that date back to the  paleolithic . Some of these are ambiguous, as they can be used either as a  tool  or a musical instrument. ref cite web url http://www.dar.cam.ac.uk/dcrr/dcrr002.pdf title "The Evolutionary Origins and Archaeology of Music author Ian Morley year 2003 format pdf ref 

  The first flutes  
 File:PiscalDivjeBabe.jpg thumb|The  Divje Babe flute 
The oldest  flute  ever discovered may be the so-called   Divje Babe flute , found in the  Slovenia n cave Divje Babe I in 1995. It is not certain that the object is really a flute. ref name Derrico cite journal   author d'Errico, Francesco, Paola Villa, Ana C. Pinto Llona, and Rosa Ruiz Idarraga   title A Middle Palaeolithic origin of music? Using cave-bear bone accumulations to assess the Divje Babe I bone 'flute'   journal Antiquity    year 1998   volume 72 (March)   pages 65-79   url    http://antiquity.ac.uk/ant/072/Ant0720065.htm    format   Abstract ref  The item in question is a fragment of the  femur  of a young cave  bear , and has been dated to about 43,000 years ago. ref cite web
   author   Tenenbaum, David
   month   June   year   2000
   url    http://whyfiles.org/114music/4.html 
   title   Neanderthal jam
   work   The Why Files
   publisher   University of Wisconsin, Board of Regents 
   accessdate   14 March 2006
 ref ref http://cogweb.ucla.edu/ep/FluteDebate.html Flute History , UCLA. Retrieved June 2007. ref  However, whether it is truly a musical instrument or simply a carnivore-chewed bone is a matter of ongoing debate. ref name Derrico 

In 2008,  archaeology archaeologists  discovered a bone flute in the  Hohle Fels  cave near  Ulm ,  Germany . ref cite journal    last   Wilford    first   John N.    authorlink       coauthors       title   Flutes offer clues to Stone-Age music     journal       volume       issue       pages      publisher   The New York Times    location       date   June 24, 2009    url    http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/25/science/25flute.html    accessdate June 29, 2009   issn       doi   10.1038/nature07995    id    ref 
 ref http://www.epoc.de/artikel/999323&_z=798890 ref  The five-holed flute has a V-shaped mouthpiece and is made from a  vulture  wing bone. The researchers involved in the discovery officially published their findings in the journal  Nature , in June 2009. The discovery is also the oldest confirmed find of any musical instrument in history. ref name BBC cite web  title 'Oldest musical instrument' found   publisher BBC news  date 2009-06-25  url http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/8117915.stm   accessdate 2009-06-26 ref  Other flutes were also found in the cave. This  flute was found next to the  Venus of Hohle Fels  and a short distance from the oldest known human carving. ref cite web  title Music for cavemen   publisher MSMBC  date 2009-06-24  url http://cosmiclog.msnbc.msn.com/archive/2009/06/24/1976108.aspx   accessdate 2009-06-26 ref  
When they announced their discovery, the scientists suggested that the "finds demonstrate the presence of a well-established musical tradition at the time when modern humans colonized Europe". ref cite web  title Flutes Offer Clues to Stone-Age Music  publisher The New York Times   date 2009-06-24  url http://www.nytimes.com/2009/06/25/science/25flute.html?_r=1&partner=rss&emc=rss   accessdate 2009-06-26 ref 

The oldest known wooden pipes were discovered near  Greystones ,  Republic of Ireland Ireland , in 2004. A wood-lined pit contained a group of six flutes made from yew wood, between 30 and 50 cm long, tapered at one end, but without any finger holes. They may once have been strapped together. ref http://www.abc.net.au/news/newsitems/s1105308.htm ref 

In 1986 several bone flutes were found in  Jiahu  in Henan Province, China. They date to about 6,000 BC. They have between 5 and 8 holes each and were made from the hollow bones of a bird, the  Red-crowned Crane . At the time of the discovery, one was found to be still playable. The bone flute plays both the five- or seven-note scale of  Xia Zhi  and six-note scale of  Qing Shang  of the ancient  Chinese musical system .
 div align centre 
 class prettytable  Periods in music history
  Dates
 Prehistoric music   br Ancient music   br Medieval music br Renaissance music br Baroque music br Classical music period br Romantic music br 
 20th century classical music Modern period 
 (before  writing )  br (before 350)  br About 350-1400 br 1400-1600 br 1600-1750 br 
1740-1820 br 1820-1900 br 1900-today 
 
 div 

  Ancient times  
It is not known what the earliest music of the  cave  people was like. Some  architecture , even some  painting s, are thousands of years old, but old music could not survive until people learned to write it down. The only way we can guess about early music is by looking at very old paintings that show people playing musical instruments, or by finding them in  archaeology archaeological  digs (digging underground to find old things). The earliest piece of music that was ever written down and that has not been lost was discovered on a tablet written in  Hurrians Hurrian , a  language  spoken in and around northern  Mesopotamia  (where Iraq is today), from about 1500 BC.

  Middle Ages  
Another early piece of written music that has survived was a  round (music) round  called  Sumer Is Icumen In . It was written down by a  monk  around the year 1250. Much of the music in the  Middle Ages  (roughly 450-1420) was  folk music  played by working people who wanted to sing or dance. When people played instruments, they were usually playing for dancers. However, most of the music that was written down was for the  Roman Catholic Catholic church . This music was written for monks to sing in church. It is called Chant (or  Gregorian chant ).

  Renaissance  
In the  Renaissance  (roughly 1400-1550) there was a lot of music, and many composers wrote music that has survived so that it can be performed, played or sung today. The name for this period (Renaissance) is a French word which means "rebirth". This period was called the "rebirth" because many new types of  art  and music were  birth reborn  during this time.

Some very beautiful music was written for use in church services (sacred music) by the Italian composer  Giovanni da Palestrina  (1525-1594). In Palestrina's music, many singers sing together (this is called a  Choir (music) choir ). There was also plenty of music not written for the church, such as happy  dance music  and romantic love songs. Popular instruments during the Renaissance included the  viol s (a  string instrument  played with a  bow (music) bow) ,  lute s (a plucked stringed instrument that is a little like a  guitar ), and the  virginal , a small, quiet  keyboard instrument .

  Baroque  
In the arts, the Baroque was a Western cultural era, which began near the turn of the 17th century in Rome. It was exemplified by drama and grandeur in sculpture, painting, literature, dance, and music. ref cite book  first Paul last Fargis title The New York Public Library Desk Reference year 1998 edition third place New York publisher Macmillan General Reference page 262 isbn 0-02-862169-7 ref  In music, the term 'Baroque' applies to the final period of dominance of imitative counterpoint, where different voices and instruments echo each other but at different pitches, sometimes inverting the echo, and even reversing thematic material.

The popularity and success of the Baroque style was encouraged by the Roman Catholic Church which had decided at the time of the Council of Trent that the arts should communicate religious themes in direct and emotional involvement. The upper class also saw the dramatic style of Baroque architecture and art as a means of impressing visitors and expressing triumphant power and control. Baroque palaces are built around an entrance of courts, grand staircases and reception rooms of sequentially increasing opulence. In similar profusions of detail, art, music, architecture, and literature inspired each other in the Baroque cultural movement as artists explored what they could create from repeated and varied patterns. Some traits and aspects of Baroque paintings that differentiate this style from others are the abundant amount of details, often bright polychromy, less realistic faces of subjects, and an overall sense of awe, which was one of the goals in Baroque art.

The word baroque probably derives from the ancient Portuguese noun "barroco" ref OED  Online. Accessed 6 June 2008. ref  which is a pearl that is not round but of unpredictable and elaborate shape. Hence, in informal usage, the word baroque can simply mean that something is "elaborate", with many details, without reference to the Baroque styles of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

  Classical period  
In western music, the  Classical music period classical period  means music from about 1750 to 1825. It was the time of composers like  Joseph Haydn ,  Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart , and  Ludwig van Beethoven . Orchestras became bigger, and composers often wrote longer pieces of music called  symphony symphonies  that had several sections (called  movement (music) movements ). Some movements of a symphony were loud and fast; other movements were quiet and sad. The form of a piece of music was very important at this time. Music had to have a nice 'shape'. They often used a structure which was called  sonata form .

Another important type of music was the  string quartet , which is a piece of music written for two  violin s, a  viola , and a  violoncello . Like symphonies, string quartet music had several sections. Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven each wrote many famous string quartets.

The piano was invented during this time. Composers liked the piano, because it could be used to play dynamics (getting louder or getting softer). Other popular instruments included the  violin , the  violoncello , the  flute , the  clarinet , and the  oboe .

  Romantic period  
The 19th century is called the  Romantic music Romantic period . Composers were particularly interested in conveying their emotions through music. An important instrument from the Romantic period was the  piano . Some composers, such as  Frederic Chopin  wrote subdued, expressive, quietly emotional piano pieces. Often music described a feeling or told a story using sounds. Other composers, such as  Franz Schubert  wrote songs for a singer and a piano player called  Lied  (the German word for "song"). These Lieder (plural of Lied) told stories by using the  lyrics  (words) of the song and by the imaginative piano  accompaniment (music) accompaniments . Other composers, like Richard Strauss, and  Franz Liszt  created narratives and told stories using only music, which is called a tone poem. Composers, such as  Franz Liszt  and  Johannes Brahms  used the piano to play loud, dramatic, strongly emotional music.

Many composers began writing music for bigger orchestras, with as many as 100 instruments. It was the period of " Nationalism " (the feeling of being proud of one's country) when many composers made music using  folk music folksong  or melodies from their country. Lots of famous composers lived at this time such as  Franz Schubert ,  Felix Mendelssohn ,  Frederic Chopin ,  Johannes Brahms ,  Pyotr Tchaikovsky  and  Richard Wagner .

  Modern times  
From about 1900 onwards is called the "modern period". Many  20th century  composers wanted to compose music that sounded different from the Classical and Romantic music. Modern composers searched for new ideas, such as using new instruments, different forms, different sounds, or different  harmony harmonies .

The composer  Arnold Schoenberg  (1874-1951) wrote pieces which were  atonal  (meaning that they did not sound as if they were in any clear musical key). Later, Schoenberg invented a new system for writing music called  twelve-tone system . Music written with the twelve-tone system sounds strange to some, but is mathematical in nature, often making sense only after careful study. Pure twelve-tone music was popular among academics in the fifties and sixties, but some composers such as  Benjamin Britten  use it today, when it is necessary to get a certain feel.

One of the most important 20th-century composers,  Igor Stravinsky  (1882-1971), wrote music with very complicated (difficult)  chord s (groups of notes that are played together) and  rhythm s. Some composers thought music was getting too complicated and so they wrote  Minimalism Minimalist  pieces which use very simple ideas. In the 1950s and 1960s, composers such as  Karlheinz Stockhausen  experimented with  electronic music , using electronic circuits,  amplifier s and  loudspeaker s. In the 1970s, composers began using electronic synthesizers and musical instruments from  rock and roll  music, such as the  electric guitar . They used these new instruments to make new sounds.

Composers writing in the 1990s and the 2000s, such as  John Adams (composer) John Adams  (born 1947) and  James MacMillan  (born 1959) often use a mixture of all these ideas, but they like to write  tonality tonal  music with easy tunes as well.

  Electronic music  
Music can be produced electronically. This is most commonly done by computers, keyboards, electric guitars and disk tables. They can mimic traditional instruments, and also produce very different sounds. 21st-century electronic music is commonly made with computer programs and hardware mixers.

  Jazz  
 Jazz  is a type of music that was invented around 1900 in  New Orleans, Louisiana New Orleans  in the south of the  United States USA . There were many black musicians living there who played a style of music called  blues  music. Blues music was influenced by  Africa n music (because the black people in the United States had come to the United States as  slave s. They were taken from Africa by force). Blues music was a music that was played by singing, using the harmonica, or the acoustic guitar. Many blues songs had sad lyrics about sad emotions (feelings) or sad experiences, such as losing a job, a family member dying, or having to go to  jail  (prison).

Jazz music mixed together blues music with  Europe an music. Some black composers such as  Scott Joplin  were writing music called  ragtime , which had a very different rhythm from standard European music, but used notes that were similar to some European music. Ragtime was a big influence on early jazz, called Dixieland jazz. Jazz musicians used instruments such as the  trumpet ,  saxophone , and  clarinet  were used for the tunes (melodies), drums for  percussion  and plucked  double bass ,  piano ,  banjo  and  guitar  for the background rhythm (rhythmic section). Jazz is usually  improvisation improvised : the players make up (invent) the music as they play. Even though jazz musicians are making up the music, jazz music still has  rule s; the musicians play a series of chords (groups of notes) in order.

Jazz music has a swinging rhythm. The word "swing" is hard to explain. For a rhythm to be a "swinging rhythm" it has to feel natural and relaxed. Swing rhythm is not even like a march. There is a long-short feel instead of a same-same feel. A "swinging rhythm" also gets the people who are listening excited, because they like the sound of it. Some people say that a "swinging rhythm" happens when all the jazz musicians start to feel the same pulse and energy from the song. If a jazz band plays very well together, people will say "that is a swinging jazz band" or "that band really swings well."

Jazz influenced other types of music like the  classical music Western art music  from the 1920s and 1930s. Art music composers such as  George Gershwin  wrote music that was influenced by jazz. Jazz music influenced  pop music  songs. In the 1930s and 1940s, many pop music songs began using chords or melodies from jazz songs. One of the best known jazz musicians was  Louis Armstrong  (1900-1971).

  Pop music  
 main  Pop music 
"Pop" music is a type of  popular  music that many people like to listen to. The term "pop music" can be used for all kinds of music that was written to be popular. The word "pop music" was used from about 1880 onwards, when a type of music called music was popular.

Modern pop music grew out of 1950s  rock and roll , (for example  Chuck Berry ,  Bo Diddley  and  Little Richard ) ref Gilliland  show 5  title Hail, Hail, Rock 'n' Roll  Shows 5, 3, 6. ref  and  rockabilly  (for example  Elvis Presley  and  Buddy Holly ). sfn  Gilliland  1969  loc shows 7, 12    In the 1960s,  The Beatles  became a famous pop music group. sfn  Gilliland  1969  loc shows 27-28, 35, 39  In the 1970s, other styles of music were mixed with pop music, such as  funk  and  soul music . Pop music generally has a heavy (strong) beat, so that it is good for dancing. Pop singers normally sing with microphones that are plugged into an  amplifier  and a  loudspeaker .

  Musical notation  
 Main Musical notation 
 File:Mozart k545 opening.png thumb|right|360px| Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart Mozart  :  First movement of the piano sonata K545'' - an example of writing music in  staff (music) staff s "Musical notation" is the way music is written down. Music needs to be written down in order to be saved and remembered for future performances. In this way composers (people who write music) can tell others how to play the musical piece as it was meant to be played.

  Solfege  
Solfege (also called solfa) is the way tones are named. It was made in order to give a name to the several tones and pitches. For example, the eight basic notes "Do, Re, Mi, Fa, So, La, Ti, Do" are just the names of the eight notes that confirm the  major scale .

  Written music  
Music can be written in several ways. When it is written on a  staff (music) staff  (like in the example shown), the pitches (tones) and their duration are represented by symbols called  Note (music) notes . Notes are put on the lines and in the spaces between the lines. Each position says which tone must be played. The higher the note is on the staff, the higher the pitch of the tone. The lower the notes are, the lower the pitch. The duration of the notes (how long they are played for) is shown by making the note "heads" black or white, and by giving them stems and flags.

Music can also be written with letters, naming them as in the solfa "Do, Re, Mi, Fa, So, La, Ti, Do" or representing them by letters. The next table shows how each note of the solfa is represented in the  Standard Notation :

 class wikitable  Solfa Name   Standard Notation
  Do   C
  Re   D
  Mi   E
  Fa   F
  Sol   G
  La   A
  Ti   B
 
The Standard Notation was made to simplify the lecture of music notes, although it is mostly used to represent  Chord (Music) chords  and the names of the  Scale (Music) music scales .

These ways to represent music ease the way a person reads music. There are more ways to write and represent music, but they are less known and may be more complicated.

  How to enjoy music  
  By listening  
People can enjoy music by listening to it. They can go to  concert s to hear musicians perform.  Classical music  is usually performed in  concert hall s, but sometimes huge festivals are organized in which it is performed outside, in a field or stadium, like pop festivals. People can listen to music on  compact disc CDs ,  PC Computers ,  iPod s,  television , the  radio ,  cassette/record-player s and even  Cell phone mobile phones .

There is so much music today, in  elevator s, shopping  mall s, and  Shop stores , that it often becomes a background sound that we do not really hear. 

  By playing or singing  
People can learn to play an instrument. Probably the most common for complete beginners is the  piano  or  keyboard instrument keyboard , the  guitar , or the  recorder  (which is certainly the cheapest to buy). After they have learnt to play  scale (music) scales , play simple  tune s and read the simplest  musical notation , then they can think about which instrument for further development. They should choose an instrument that is practical for their size. For example, a very short child cannot play a full size  double bass , because the double bass is over five feet high. People should choose an instrument that they enjoy playing, because playing regularly is the only way to get better. Finally, it helps to have a good  teacher .

  By composing  
Anyone can make up his or her own pieces of music. It is not difficult to compose simple songs or melodies (tunes). It's easier for people who can play an instrument themselves. All it takes is experimenting with the sounds that an instrument makes. Someone can make up a piece that tells a story, or just find a nice tune and think about ways it can be changed each time it is repeated. The instrument might be someone's own voice.

  Related pages  
   Classical music 
   Jazz  music
   Cuban music 
   Musical instrument 
   Orchestra 
   Pop music 
   Scale (music) 

  References  

 reflist 2 
  Books  
  The Oxfords Companion to Music, ed. Percy Scholes, London 1970
  The New Groves Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. Stanley Sadie, London 1980

  Other websites  
 sisterlinks 
   http://www.rockhall.com/ The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum 
   http://www.music-city.org Music City the free music encyclopedia 
   http://www.bbc.co.uk/music/childrens/ BBC Music - Childrens 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Music  * 
 Category:Non-verbal communication