Bible

about the Christian Bible the Hebrew one Hebrew Bible 
 File:Holy bible book.jpg thumb|right|300px|The Holy Bible. 

The  Bible , also known as  Holy Bible  is a group of  religious   text s of  Judaism  or  Christianity . The word Bible comes from the  Ancient Greek language Greek  word ta  lang grc biblia   ( biblia ) which means "books" in  English language English , because it is many books in one book. It includes  law s, stories,  prayer s, songs, and wise words. A number of texts are both in the  Hebrew Bible , used by  Jews , and this Christian one. The Islamic name for the Bible is the  Injil .

When talking about the Bible, a  book  is used to speak about a number of texts. All the texts that make a  book  are believed to belong together. Most of the time, people believe they were written or collected by the same person. The Bible contains different kinds of such books. Some are history, telling the stories of the  Jew s,  Jesus , or Jesus' followers. Some are collections of  wise  sayings. Some are God's commands to His people, which He expects them to obey. Some are songs of praise to God. Some are books of  prophecy , messages from  God  that He gave through chosen people called prophets. The Bible is really one great story of salvation.

 Christian  Bibles range from the 66 books of the  Protestantism Protestant  canon to 81 books in the  Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church Ethiopian Orthodox  Bible. ref name Ethiopian http://www.ethiopianorthodox.org/english/canonical/books.html ref  The oldest surviving Christian Bible is the  Codex Sinaiticus , a Greek manuscript from the fourth century AD. ref Codex Sinaiticus:  http://codexsinaiticus.org/en/codex/ ref  The oldest complete Hebrew manuscripts date from the  Middle Ages . ref http://books.google.com.au/books?id=M1rS4Kce_PMC&lpg=PP1&ots=F92fs-7_dq&dq=Memories%20of%20Ancient%20Israel&pg=PA7#v=onepage&q&f=false Philip R. Davies, "Memories of ancient Israel", p.7 ref 

 How it was written 
For a long time the texts were passed on by word of mouth from  generation  to generation. The Bible was written long ago in  Aramaic language Aramaic ,  Hebrew language Hebrew , and  Greek language Greek . Translations were made later into  Latin  and some other languages. Now there are translations in English and many other languages. The books of the Hebrew Bible--what Christians call the  Old Testament --were not all written at the same time. It took hundreds of years (about 1200 years). The  process  of putting it all together began around 400 B.C. The  New Testament , which was originally written in  Greek language Greek , began to be put together in about 100  Anno Domini A.D. 

  Translations and versions  
A  translation  is when a  scribe  takes the  source  in one language and writes it in another  language . Most texts of the Bible were written in  Ancient Greek language Ancient Greek  or in  Aramaic language Aramaic  or  Hebrew language Hebrew .

The first to provide a translation into  Latin  was  Jerome , in the 5th century. He started what is known as the Vulgate today.  Wufila  translated the Bible into the  Gothic language Gothic  language. In the early Middle Ages, people such as  Petrus Valdes , and  Jan Hus  provided translations.

The New Testament was first translated into English in 1382 by  John Wycliffe , and his associates translated the Old Testament. The translation was made from the  Vulgate  Latin bible. Wycliffe did this so that people could see for themselves what the Bible said. The translation was completed in 1382. There were some later editions by other people to the Wycliffe bible, as it is called. It was translated into  Middle English , the language of his day. Wycliffe did not have Church permission to do this, but he was protected by  John of Gaunt , one of the most powerful men in the kingdom. After both Wycliffe and his protector were dead, the Church declared Wycliffe a  heretic  in 1415, and banned his writings. The  Council of Constance  decreed Wycliffe's works should be burned and his remains exhumed (dug up). Why was the Church so opposed? The translations challenged the Church's authority over the people. In church, explaining the Bible was the priest's work. Whatever he said could not be challenged. Once the ordinary people could read the Bible, they might have other opinions.

The next step in translation was done in 1525 by  William Tyndale . His translation was into  Early Modern English , which we can just about understand today. Tyndale also did it without Church permission. His was the first translation to be  print ed, and several thousand copies were made. He had no protector, and his fate was terrible. He fled to Europe, but the agents of  Thomas More  (Chancellor of England at the time) eventually found him. Both Tyndale and his printer were executed by burning at the stake.

Another well known translation is the 1611 King James translation (commonly known as the Authorized King James Version of the Bible).

Some texts were written by  historian s who tried to show what  history of ancient Israel and Judah Ancient Israel  was like. Other texts are  poem s about  God  and his work. And others were used to make  law s. Followers of Judaism and Christianity consider the Bible  sacred  but they do not all agree about what belongs in the Bible. What is considered part of the Bible changed with history. Different  Christian denomination denominations  include certain parts or leave out other parts. There is not one single version of the Bible; both the content of the books and their order may change.

Languages do not match. When a translation is done, the translator has to decide between translation word for word, or capturing the sense of the text. When he decides to capture the sense, he will choose other words in the target language. This is called paraphrasing. 

Today there are  dozen s of  version s of the Bible. Some are translations and some are paraphrases. A paraphrased version is where people take a translation and put it in their own words. As the Bible has been translated into modern languages, it is also possible that there are different translations of the same texts. The Bible is the best selling book of all time. 2.5 billion to more than 6 billion copies of the Bible have been sold to date. ref name RussellAsh Cite book   author  Ash, Russell   authorlink    coauthors    title Top 10 of Everything 2002   year 2001   publisher Dorling Kindersley   location    isbn 0789480433, 9780789480439  ref ref http://www.businessweek.com/innovate/content/jul2005/di20050721_060250.htm Businessweek  on  The Bible : "The Bible (2.5 billion copies sold)" (18 July 2005) ref  A complete version of the Bible exists in 471 languages. Parts have been translated in 2225 languages. ref http://wycliff.de/?q=zahlen_und_statistik Wycliffe translators' homepage , (Sept 2009) ref  Most Bibles can be found in the  British Museum  in  London .

  Old Testament  
 main Old Testament 
The Christian Bible is a collection of 66 books. The first 39 books are the Old Testament. It is the first part of the God's story of salvation. "Salvation" is God's long work of saving us from our sins. "Sin" is what happened when people decided to live their own way instead of God's way in the world that God created. That was when God began His great work of saving us from our sins. 
To prepare the way, God had to destroy the whole world by a great flood, except for the family of Noah. Then God raised up a new people for Himself. They were the ancient Hebrews. God promised the Hebrews they would bring His salvation to the whole world. 
The first five books of the Old Testament are mostly the story of how God chose the ancient Hebrews and taught them his laws. Following these are the twelve books that tell the history of the Hebrews. The next five are books of poetry and wisdom. One of these five books, the "Psalms", is a book of songs showing mainly how God wants to be worshiped. 
The last seventeen books of the Old Testament were written by Hebrew prophets. These books tell about God's disappointment with the ancient Hebrews and His promise to bring them back to friendship with Him. The prophets also foretell a great surprise God was planning for the world-He was going to send His very own Son, the Messiah (the "Anointed One"), the Saviour, to save us from our sins.
You can read about this Messiah in the New Testament.
In the Old Testament,  Tanakh  was mostly written in  Hebrew language Hebrew ; a few parts were written in  Aramaic . This part of the Bible is considered to be holy by  Jews  as well as Christians.

There are also a few books of the Old Testament's time called  Deuterocanonical  by those Churches that accept them as part of the Bible, and  Apocrypha  by those that do not.

  New Testament  
 main New Testament 
The second part is called the New Testament. The main part of this book is the story of the life of  Jesus Christ . The four different versions of this story in the New Testament are called the  Gospel s. After the Gospels, there is also the story of what happened to the  Church  after Jesus's death. Part of this is told through letters by early Christian leaders, especially  Saint Paul . One of the most quoted verses in the Bible is  John 3:16 : "For God so loved the world that He gave His one and only Son, that whoever believes in Him shall not perish  nowiki [die] nowiki  but have eternal life."  sup NIV sup 

  Views about the Bible  
People have different ideas about the Bible. Christians believe it is God's Word to people. The Jews believe that only the Old Testament is from God. Protestants and Catholics believe that the Old and New Testaments are God's Word. Catholics also believe that the books called Apocrypha or Deuterocanonical are part of the Bible. Sometimes different  Christian denomination denominations  disagree over exactly what the Bible means.

According to  Islam , much of the Bible is true, but the  Koran  is better.

 Atheist s do not believe that gods exist, so the Bible is an ancient book about a religion.

 Deist s believe in God, but they believe that the Bible was written by people, so they don't see it as so important.

  Some people in the Bible  
 Div col 
   Abraham 
   King   David 
   Isaac 
   Jacob 
   James (son of Zebedee) 
   Jesus Christ 
   John the Apostle 
   Joseph (Bible) Joseph 
   Luke the Evangelist 
   Mark the Evangelist 
   The Virgin Mary 
   Matthew the Evangelist 
   Moses 
   Book of Joshua Joshua 
   Noah 
   Saint Peter 
   Paul of Tarsus Saint Paul 
   First Epistle to Timothy Timothy 
   adam and eve Adam 
   adam and eve Eve 
 Div col end 

  References  
 reflist 
   Entre Galilee et l'Eglise : la Bible. , Une mise au point. Etude. Joel COL. ISBN 2-9520299-0-3, AutoEdition Meguila, 2003.

  Other websites  
   http://www.biblegateway.com/ The Bible Gateway: the complete Bible online 
   http://www.easyenglish.info/ The Bible in Simple English 

 Christianityfooter 
 Books of the Bible 

 Category:Bible  