Metal

Some  chemical element s are called  metals .  They are the majority of elements in the  periodic table . These elements usually have the following properties:
 They can conduct electricity and heat.
 They can be formed easily.
 They have a shiny appearance.
 They have a high melting point.
Most metals are solid at room temperature, but this does not have to be the case.  Mercury (element) Mercury  is liquid.  Alloy s are mixtures, where at least one part of the mixture is a metal. Examples of metals are   aluminium ,  copper ,  iron ,  tin ,  gold ,  lead ,  silver ,  titanium ,  uranium , and  zinc . Well-known alloys include  bronze  and  steel . 

The  Research study  of metals is called  metallurgy .

  The ways that metals are alike (properties of metals)  
Most metals are hard, shiny, they feel heavy and they  melt  only when they are heated at very high temperatures . Lumps of metal will make a bell-like sound when they are hit with something heavy (they are  sonorous ).
 Heat  and  electricity  can easily pass through a metal (it is  electrical conductivity conductive ). A lump of metal can be beaten into a thin sheet (it is  malleability malleable ) or can be pulled into thin wires (it is  ductility ductile ).  Metal is hard to pull apart (it has a high  tensile strength ) or smash (it has a high  compressive strength ).  If you push on a long, thin piece of metal, it will bend, not break (it is  elasticity (physics) elastic ). Except for cesium, copper, and gold, metals have a neutral, silvery color.

Not all metals have these properties. Mercury, for instance, is liquid at room temperature,  Lead , is very soft, and heat and electricity do not pass through  iron  as well as they do through  copper .

  Use of metals  
 File:Prokudin-Gorskii-25.jpg thumb|right|A bridge in Russia made of metal, probably iron or steel. 
Metals are very useful to people. They are used to make  tool s  because they can be strong and easy to shape. Iron and steel have been used to make  bridge s,  building s, or  ship s. 

Some metals are used to make items like  coin s because they are hard and will not wear away quickly. For example  copper  (which is shiny and red in color),  aluminium  (which is shiny and white),  gold  (which is yellow and shiny), and  silver  and  nickel  (also white and shiny). 

Some metals, like  steel , can be made sharp and stay sharp, so they can be used to make  knife knives ,  axe s or  razor s.

Rare metals with high value, like  gold ,  silver  and  platinum  are often used to make  jewellery . Metals are also used to make  fastener s and  screw s.  Pot s used for  cooking  can be made from  copper ,  aluminium ,  steel  or  iron .  Lead  is very  heavy  and  dense  and can be used as  ballast  in  boat s to stop them from turning over, or to protect people from  ionizing radiation .

 Alloys of metals   	 
Many things that are made of metals may, in fact, be made of mixtures of at least one metal with either other metals, or with non-metals. These mixtures are called  alloy s. Some common alloys are:	 		
   Steel  ( iron  and  carbon ) (Carbon is a non-metal) 	 
   Brass  ( copper  and  zinc ) 	 
   Bronze  ( copper  and  tin ) 	 
   Duralumin  ( aluminum aluminium  and  copper ) 	 
   Gunmetal  ( copper ,  tin , and  zinc )

People first began making things from metal over 9000 years ago, when they discovered how to get copper from its ore. They then learned how to make a harder alloy, bronze, by adding tin to the copper. About 3000 years ago, they discovered iron. By adding small amounts of carbon to iron, they found that they could make a particularly useful alloy - steel.

  Metals in chemistry  
In  chemistry , metal is a word for a group of chemical  chemical element elements  that have certain  properties . It is easy for the  atom s of a metal to lose an  electron  and become positive  ion s, or  cation s. In this way, metals are not like the other two kinds of elements - the  nonmetal s and the  metalloid s. 

On the  periodic table , we can draw a zigzag line from the  chemical element element   boron  (symbol B) to the  chemical element element   polonium  (symbol Po). The elements that this line passes through are the  metalloid s. The elements that are above and to the right of this line are the  nonmetal s. The rest of the elements are the metals.

Most of the properties of metals are due to the fact that the  atom s in the metal do not hold onto their  electron s very tightly. Each atom is separated from the others by a thin  layer  of  valence   electron s.
However, some metals are different. An example is the metal  sodium . It is  wikt:soft soft , melts at a low  temperature , and is so  density light , it  float s on  water . People should not try this though, because another property of  sodium  is that it  explodes  when it touches  water . 

Most metals are  chemical ly  stable , and do not  react  easily. (Some of the metals do  react . These are the  alkali  metals like  sodium  (symbol Na) and the  alkaline   earth metal s like  calcium  (symbol Ca).)
When metals do  react , they often  react  with  oxygen . The  oxide s of metals are  Base (chemistry) basic . The  oxide s of  nonmetal s are  acid ic.
Nonetheless most  chemical element elements  on the  periodic table  are metals.

 Chemical compound Compounds , which have metal  atom s combined with other  atom s to make  molecules , are probably the most common substances on Earth. For example, common  salt  is a  chemical compound compound  of  sodium .

  Metals in history  
 File:Native copper.jpg thumb|right|A lump of pure copper found as native copper 
The use of metals is said to be the thing that makes people different from  animal s. Before they used metals, people made  tool s from  stone s,  wood , and  animal   bone s. This is now called the  Stone Age . 

No-one knows when the first metal was found and used. It was probably what is called  native copper , which is sometimes found in large lumps on the ground. People learned to make this into  copper   tool s and other things, although, for a metal, it is quite soft. When it was melted over  fire , people learned how to make an  alloy  called  bronze , which is much  wikt:hard harder  and  wikt:strong stronger  than  copper . People made  knives  and  weapon s from  bronze . This time in  human   history , after about 3300 BC is often called the  Bronze Age , that is, the time of bronze tools and weapons. 

Around the year 1200 BC some people learned to make  iron  tools and weapons. These were even harder and stronger than bronze and this was an  advantage  in  war . The time of iron tools and weapons is now called the  Iron Age 
.
Metals have been very important in  human   history  and  civilization . Iron and steel were important in the making of  machine s.  Gold  and  silver  were used as  money  in order to allow people to  trade , that is,  exchange   Good (economics) goods  and  service s over long  distance s.

Since these metals were money for a long time, many people thought that finding metals was a way to get rich. There have been many times when gold was found and people moved quickly in large numbers to those places for example,  Central America Central  and  South America  after the year 1500, and many places after the year 1800 (the  United States of America ,  Canada ,  Australia ,  New Zealand  and  South Africa ). These are often called  Gold Rush es.

  Metals in astronomy  

In  astronomy , a metal is any  chemical element element  other than  hydrogen  or  helium .  This is because these two elements (and sometimes  lithium ) are the only ones that form outside  star s.  In the  sky , a  spectrometer  can see the signs of metals and show the  astronomer  the metals in a  star .

 Related pages 
   Metallurgy 
   Money 
   Mining 
   Gold Rush 
   History 

 Periodic Table 

 Category:Metals  