Mass

otheruses 
The  mass  of an object is a  measure  of an object's resistance to  acceleration , sometimes also called "inertia". A mountain has typically more mass than a rock, for instance. Mass should not be confused with the related but quite different concept of  weight . A large mass like the Earth will attract a small mass like a human being with enough force to keep the human being from floating away. "Mass attraction" is another word for gravity, a force that exists between all matter.

  Units of mass  
The unit of mass in the  International System of Units  is the  kilogram , which is represented by the symbol 'kg'. Fractions and multiples of this basic unit include the gram (one thousandth of a kg, symbol 'g') and the  ton ne (one thousand kg), amongst many others.

In some fields or applications, it is convenient to use different units to simplify the discussions or writings. For instance,
  Atomic physicists deal with the tiny masses of individual  atom s and measure them in  atomic mass unit s.
  Jewelers normally work with small gems and precious stones where masses are traditionally measured in  Carat (mass) carats , which correspond to 200 mg or 0.2 g.
  The masses of stars are very large and are sometimes expressed in units of  Solar mass es.

Traditional units are still in encountered in some countries:  Imperial unit s such as the  ounce  or the  Pound (mass) pound  were in widespread use within the British Empire. Some of them are still popular in the United States, which also uses units like the short  ton  ton (2,000 pounds) and the long ton (2,240 pounds), not to be confused with the metric tonne (1,000 kg).

  Conservation of mass and relativity  
Mass is an intrinsic property of the object: it does not depend on its volume, or position in space, for instance. For a long time (at least since the works of  Antoine Lavoisier  in the second half of the eighteen century), it has been known that the sum of the masses of objects that interact or of the  Chemical substance chemicals  that react remain conserved throughout these processes. This remains an excellent approximation for everyday life and even most laboratory work.

However, Einstein has shown through his  Special relativity special theory of relativity  that the mass  m  of an object moving at speed  v  with respect to an observer must be higher than the mass of the same object observed at rest  m sub 0 sub  with respect to the observer. The applicable formula is

 math m=\frac{m_0}{\sqrt{1 - (v^2/c^2)}} math 

where  c  stands for the  speed of light . This change in mass is only important when the speed of the object with respect to the observer becomes a large fraction of  c .

  Related pages 
   Mass versus weight 
   Center of mass .
   Gravity .
   Density .
  For advanced study of the concept of mass, see  Standard Model  and  Higgs field .
   Body mass index 

 Category:Physical quantity 
 Category:Matter 
 Category:Mechanics