Hair

File:Beautiful healty hair.JPG thumb|Long, brown hair   Hair  is something that grows from the  skin  of  mammal s. Animal hair is usually called  fur .  Sheep  and  goat s have curly hair, which is usually called  wool . Hair is made of  keratin nowiki s, which are  protein s.

 Human s and some other  animals  have lost much of their hair through  evolution , and some other mammals, such as the  elephant  and the  whale , have almost none at all.

 Functions of hair 
 File:Just one lion.jpg thumb|The male lion's mane has several functions 
Hair can have different functions: ref http://www.keratin.com/aa/aa031.shtml ref 
 It can protect against losing body heat. This is thought to be the basic, original function of hair. ref http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=why-do-humans-get-goosebu ref ref http://goaskalice.columbia.edu/whats-point-pubic-hair ref 
 It protects against  UV   radiation , which damages the skin.
 It can protect against rain or water. Air can be trapped in the fur, or oil can be secreted by the skin. Both these methods prevent the rain or water from  making the body too cold. Aquatic mammals in cold waters usually have blubber (fat) under the skin, and almost no hair.
 Defence: hair is modified in mammals like  porcupines , for protection.
 Hair colouring can perform different functions. It helps to  camouflage  in some animals, and to signal to others of the same  species  in some other animals. Examples are: signalling to females for mating purposes and signalling to others for territory control. Signalling danger to other species ( aposematic  colouring) is also done by, for example,  skunk s.
 Animals can change their hair so they look bigger, or more threatening. This can also be used for mating; which is the case with  lion s, for example. Also, the male lions' mane also protects their neck from damage when fighting other males.

 False hair 
Some animals, for example certain  insect s and  spider s also have  hairs . However, these are not hair in the biological sense, but are actually  bristle s. The  hairs  found on certain plants are also not true hair, but  trichome s.

  Human hair  
 Image:Mark Twain-Shirtless-ca1883.jpg right|thumb|A man with hair on his head, face, and body. 
In  human s, hair grows mostly on the  head , and the amount of body hair is different from  race (sociology) race  to race.  Asian s and native North Americans have the least amount of body hair, while  Caucasian s tend to have the most. ref http://www.belgraviacentre.com/blog/hair-types-and-race-differences/ ref 

  Hair color  
 File:Hair colors.jpg thumb|230px|Different human hair colors; From top to left, clockwise:  black ,  brown ,  blonde ,  white ,  red . 
Hair color is passed down by parents only. Natural hair color can be given only by  genes . It is impossible to have a hair color that is not passed down  genetics genetically  by both mother and father. This relies on  dominant  and  recessive   genes  carried by a parent.  These genes may not be the color of their hair, however, many people carry  genes  that are  recessive  and do not show in their traits or features.

 Dye ing hair is to change the color of hair. It consists of a  chemical  mixture which can change the color of hair by a  chemical  reaction. Many people dye their hair to hide gray or white hairs.  This is because most people gain white or gray hairs as they grow older.

  Genetics and chemistry  
Two types of  melanin  pigment give hair its color:  eumelanin  and  pheomelanin . Pheomelanin colors hair red. Eumelanin determines the darkness of the hair color. A low concentration of brown eumelanin results in blond hair, but more brown eumelanin will color the hair brown. High amounts of black eumelanin result in black hair, while low concentrations give gray hair. All humans have some pheomelanin in their hair.

The genetics of hair colors are not yet firmly established. According to one theory, at least two gene pairs control human hair color.

One phenotype (brown/blond) has a  dominant  brown  allele  and a  recessive   blond  allele. A person with a brown allele will have brown hair; a person with no brown alleles will be blond. This explains why two brown-haired parents can produce a blond-haired child.

The other gene pair is a non-red/red pair, where the not-red allele  is dominant and the allele for red hair is recessive. A person with two copies of the red-haired allele will have red hair, but it will be either auburn or bright reddish orange depending on whether the first gene pair gives brown or blond hair, respectively.

The two-gene model does not account for all possible shades of brown, blond, or red (for example, platinum blond versus dark blonde/light brown), nor does it explain why hair color sometimes darkens as a person ages. Several other gene pairs control the light versus dark hair color in a cumulative effect ( quantitative genetics ).

  Hair texture  
Hair texture is also inherited genetically. The thickness of hair, its color and its tendency to curl are all inherited. There are also genetic differences between men and women. Body hair is limited in women, and thicker in men.

  Hair loss  
 File:Ad van Liempt.jpg thumb|Typical male pattern baldness  People have about 100,000 hairs on their head.  About 100 fall out each day, but they usually grow back. Some men are bald but girls and women may become bald if they lose their hair from a disease called  alopecia .

Men often lose some of their hair as they grow older. This is known as  baldness . Doctors call it " male pattern baldness " because hairs often fall out in similar places. It often begins by hair falling out first from the front of the head, and then from the top of the head. After a while, all that may be left is a some hair running above the ears and around the lower back of the head. Even though it is unusual for women to go bald, many women suffer from thinning hair over the top of their head as they grow old.

People have tried to find cures for hair loss for thousands of years. In an effort to get their hair back, men have tried "cures" like applying strange lotions or even having their heads packed in  chicken   manure . ref http://hisrad.org/what-are-the-causes-of-hair-loss-in-women/ ref fact date April 2009  Many unproven "cures" are still marketed today. It is only in the last decade or so that  treatment s have been developed which do sometimes work. Some doctors do hair  transplant s, where they take tiny plugs of hair from areas like the back of the neck and plant them in the bald spots on the head. Some  drug s have been tested and approved for sale as hair loss treatments. They encourage hair regrowth and thickening, but work better if applied before hair loss turns to baldness.

  History and culture  
 File:Orit's Cornrows work.jpg thumb|A braided hairstyle   File:Visualfan.jpg thumb|A bold hair color and style  People have been interested in hair on their heads for hundreds of thousands of years. For both men and women, styling and coloring hair have been ways to look good, and get attention. Sometimes society makes rules about hair, for example by not allowing people to cut their hair or  beard s, like in  Sikhism  (it is also good to do this in Islam, but not a requirement). ref http://www.islamic-laws.com/beard.htm ref 

 Notes 
 commonscat Hair 
 reflist 

 Mycoses 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Hair  