Queen

unsourced date January 2010 
 about the  United Kingdom British   rock and roll rock   band Queen (band) their first  album Queen (album) 

In a  country  whose system of  government  is a  monarchy , the ruler, or  head of state , is decided by  inheritance . That is, when a ruler dies their child, or nearest relative, takes over. For much of  history  most countries were governed in this way, especially in Europe. Some countries elect their monarch instead of using inheritance, like the  Holy Roman Empire  and  Malaysia .

The  wife  of a king is also called a queen. However the husband of a female ruler is not called a king. The last King of Britain ( George VI of the United Kingdom George VI ) had a wife (Elizabeth) who was called  Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon Queen Elizabeth . He had no sons, so he was followed by his elder daughter. She is also called Elizabeth and became  Queen Elizabeth II . She is married to  Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh The Duke of Edinburgh ; but when she became Queen he did not become King.

Many people do not think it is good to have a Queen, because she is not elected, though most people in the UK want to keep the royal family.

 Queen regnant 

A  queen regnant  is Head of State, and has all the powers of a  sovereign .

A queen regnant does not keep the title of queen if she  abdicates  (resigns).  No Queen has ever abdicated in the  history of the United Kingdom , but two abdications have occurred in the  Kingdom of the Netherlands :
 Wilhelmina of the Netherlands Queen Wilhelmina  abdicated in 1948 and became Princess Wilhelmina.  Her daughter became  Juliana of the Netherlands Queen Juliana .
 Queen Juliana abdicated and became Princess Juliana.

  Queen consort  

A  queen consort  is the wife of a king.  She is not the  head of state , and does not have any powers unless they are given by the King or another  law .

  Queen dowager  

A  queen dowager  is the  widow  of a king.

A queen consort usually keeps the title of Queen after her husband's  death , for example
 Mary of Teck Queen Mary , widow of King  George V of the United Kingdom  and
 Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon Queen Elizabeth , widow of King  George VI of the United Kingdom , she was given the title Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother because her daughter is also called  Elizabeth II Elizabeth .

 Category:Kings and queens  