Provinces and territories of Canada

File:Political map of Canada.png 500px|right 
 Canada , a  country  and  sovereign state  in the northern part of  North America , is made up of thirteen  administrative division s: ten  province s and three  territory territories .

The different levels of  government  in Canada are based on the principles of a  federation : those of each of the provinces and territories share power with the  Government of Canada federal government . The territories' governments have a more limited set of powers versus the federal government than that of the provinces'.

The provinces are in the south of Canada, near the  border  with the  United States . They go from the  Atlantic Ocean  in the east to the  Pacific Ocean  in the west. The territories are to the north, where fewer people live, close to the  Arctic Circle  and  Arctic Ocean .

Here is a list of the provinces and territories, and their standard  abbreviation s, with their  capital city capital s (the cities where their governments are based) and largest  city cities . Canada's national capital, where the federal government meets, is  Ottawa .

 class wikitable style font-size:90%;width:90%; text-align:left; 
 bgcolor #efefef Province name
 bgcolor #efefef Abbreviation
 bgcolor #efefef Capital city
 bgcolor #efefef Largest city (if not the capital)

 Alberta 
 AB
 Edmonton 
 Calgary 

 British Columbia 
 BC
 Victoria, British Columbia Victoria 
 Vancouver 
 
 
 Manitoba 
 MB
 Winnipeg 
 

 New Brunswick 
 NB
 Fredericton  
 Saint John, New Brunswick Saint John 

 Newfoundland and Labrador 
 NL
 St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador St. John's 
 

 Nova Scotia 
 NS
 Halifax, Nova Scotia Halifax 
 

 Ontario 
 ON
 Toronto
  

 Prince Edward Island 
 PE
 Charlottetown 
 

 Quebec 
 QC
 Quebec City 
 Montreal 

 Saskatchewan 
 SK
 Regina, Saskatchewan Regina 
 Saskatoon 

 

 class wikitable style font-size:90%;width:90%; text-align:left; 
 bgcolor #efefef Territory name
 bgcolor #efefef Abbreviation
 bgcolor #efefef Capital and largest city

 Yukon 
 YT
 Whitehorse 

 Nunavut 
 NU
 Iqaluit 

 Northwest Territories 
 NT
 Yellowknife  
 

 Provinces and territories of Canada 
 Canada capitals 

 Category:Provinces and territories of Canada   
 Category:Capital cities in Canada   
 Category:Lists of cities in North America 
 Category:Canada-related lists