Currency

Currency  is the  unit  of  money  used by the people of a  country  or Union for buying and selling  Product (consumer goods) goods  and  service s.

Certain currencies are said to be "pegged" or "fixed" to something, usually another currency. A fixed or pegged currency is one that has a constant value compared to what it is pegged to. For example, the  Cape Verde Cape Verdian   escudo  is pegged to the  Euro . If the value of the Euro goes up 1% compared to another form of currency, the value of the escudo also goes up 1% compared to that same currency. Many countries have used systems where their money was pegged to something other than currency, for example  gold . When they do this, as the value of gold increases, so does the value of their money. Doing this is commonly called using the "Gold standard". Most countries stopped using the Gold standard in the 20th century. 

Some well-known currencies are:
  the  United States dollar 
  the Euro
  the  Pound sterling British pound 

Currency  names  of the world, in order of the first letter, by currency name:

   Afghan afghani Afghani  -  Afghanistan 
   Baht  -  Thailand 
   Balboa (currency) Balboa  -  Panama  ( United States dollar U.S. dollar  used for paper money)
   Birr  -  Ethiopia 
   Venezuelan bolivar Bolivar  -  Venezuela 
   Boliviano  -  Bolivia 
   Cedi  -  Ghana 
   Costa Rican colon Colon  -  Costa Rica 
   Cordoba (currency) Cordoba  -  Nicaragua 
  Crown -  Czech Republic  ( koruna ),  Denmark  ( Danish krone krone ),  Estonia  ( kroon ),  Iceland  ( krona ),  Norway  ( Norwegian krone krone ),  Sweden  ( krona ). See also: British  Crown (coin) 
   Dalasi  -  The Gambia 
   Dinar  -  Algeria ,  Bahrain ,  Iraq ,  Jordan ,  Kuwait ,  Serbia ,  Tunisia  
   Dirham  -  Morocco ,  United Arab Emirates ,  Libya ,  Qatar ,  Jordan 
   Dollar  - Many countries
   Dong (currency) Dong  -  Vietnam 
   Drachma  - ( Greece --now uses  euro )
   Armenian dram Dram  -  Armenia 
   Escudo  -  Cape Verde , ( Portugal --now uses  euro )
   Euro  
   European Union  (as an organisation; the euro is not  legal tender  in every EU country.)
  EU members:  Austria ,  Belgium ,  Estonia ,  Finland ,  France  (except Pacific territories using  CFP Franc ),  Germany ,  Greece ,  Republic of Ireland Ireland ,  Italy ,  Latvia ,  Lithuania ,  Luxembourg ,  Netherlands ,  Portugal ,  Slovakia ,  Spain . 
  Countries that have made legal agreements with the EU to use the euro:  Andorra ,  Monaco ,  San Marino ,  Vatican City .
  Countries that unilaterally use the euro:  Montenegro  and  Kosovo .
  Currencies pegged to the euro:  Cape Verde Cape Verdian   escudo ,  CFA franc ,  CFP Franc ,  Comoran francs ,  Bulgaria n  lev ,  Danish krone , the  convertible marka  of  Bosnia and Herzegovina  
   Forint  -  Hungary 
   Franc  
  Swiss franc -  Switzerland ,  Liechtenstein .
   CFA franc  -  Benin ,  Burkina Faso ,  Burundi ,  Cameroon ,  Central African Republic ,  Chad ,  Cote d'Ivoire ,  Democratic Republic of the Congo ,  Equatorial Guinea ,  Gabon ,  Guinea ,  Guinea-Bissau ,  Republic of the Congo , 
   CFP Franc  - France's Pacific territories of  New Caledonia ,  French Polynesia ,  Wallis and Futuna .
  Comoran francs -  Comoros  (pegged to the French franc, then the euro).
  Djiboutian franc -  Djibouti  (pegged to the US dollar since 1973).
  Formerly using  Luxembourg franc Begian-luxembourgish franc  -  Belgium ,  Luxembourg .
  Formerly using French franc:  Andorra ,  Monaco ,  France  (including:  French Guiana ,  Guadeloupe ,  Martinique  and  La Reunion ,  Saint Pierre and Miquelon  and  Mayotte ). 
   Gourde  -  Haiti 
   Guilder  -  Aruba ,  Netherlands Antilles  ( Netherlands --now uses  euro )
   Iranian real  -  Iran 
   Kina  -  Papua New Guinea 
   Czech koruna Koruna  -  Czech Republic  ( Slovakia  now uses  euro )
   Kroon  -  Estonia 
   Swedish krona Krona  -  Iceland ,  Sweden 
   Danish krone Krone  -  Denmark ,  Faroe Islands ,  Greenland ,  Norway 
   Kuna  -  Croatia 
   Kwacha  -  Zambia  and  Malawi 
   Kwanza  -  Angola 
   Kyat  -  Burma 
   Lari  -  Georgia (country) Georgia 
   Latvian lats Lats  -  Latvia 
   Lek (currency) Lek  -  Albania 
   Lempira  -  Honduras 
   Leone  -  Sierra Leone 
   Leu  -  Romania ,  Moldova 
   Lev  -  Bulgaria 
   Lira  - ( Cyprus ,  Italy ,  San Marino ,  Vatican City --now use  euro )
   Turkish lira  -  Turkey 
   Litas  -  Lithuania 
   Manat 
   Azerbaijani manat  -  Azerbaijan 
   Turkmen manat  -  Turkmenistan 
   Deutsche Mark Mark  - ( Germany -- now uses  euro )
   Marka  -  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
   Markka  - ( Finland  now uses  euro )
   Nakfa  -  Eritrea 
   Namibian dollars  -  Namibia 
   Ngultrum  -  Bhutan 
   Pataca  -  Macau 
   Peseta  - ( Andorra ,  Spain --now use  euro )
   Peso  -  Argentina ,  Chile ,  Colombia ,  Cuba ,  Dominican Republic  ( Dominican peso ,  Mexico ,  Philippines ,  Uruguay 
   Pound (currency) Pound  -  Cyprus ,  Egypt ,  Falkland Islands ,  Gibraltar ,  Guernsey ,  Jersey ,  United Kingdom  ( Republic of Ireland Ireland --now uses  euro )
   Pula (currency) Pula  -  Botswana 
   Quetzal (currency) Quetzal  -  Guatemala 
   South African rand Rand  -  South Africa 
   Real (currency) Real  -  Brazil 
   Renminbi  -  People's Republic of China 
   Riel  -  Cambodia 
   Ringgit  -  Malaysia 
   Saudi riyal Riyal  -  Saudi Arabia 
   Rouble  -  Belarus ,  Russia 
   Rufiyah  -  Maldives 
   Rupee  -  Republic of India ,  Mauritius ,  Nepal ,  Pakistan ,  Seychelles ,  Sri Lanka 
   Rupiah  -  Indonesia 
   Schilling  - ( Austria --now uses  euro )
   Shekel  -  Israel ,  Gaza Strip ,  West Bank 
   Shilling  -  Kenya 
   Sol (currency) Sol  -  Peru 
   Som  -  Kyrgyzstan 
   Sucre (currency) Sucre  -  Ecuador 
   Taka  -  Bangladesh 
   Tenge  -  Kazakhstan 
   Tolar  -  Slovenia 
   Toman  -  Iran 
  Vietnam ~ Dong (DVN) 
   Won  -  North Korea ,  South Korea 
   Yen  -  Japan 
   Renminbi Yuan  -  People's Republic of China 
   Zloty  -  Poland 

 Category:Currency  