Dance

File:Musicians_and_dancers_on_fresco_at_Tomb_of_Nebamun.jpg thumb|300px| Ancient Egypt ian dancing girls and musicians 
 File:Zulu dance (cropped).PNG thumb|right|300px|Every known traditional culture has types of dance: this is a  Zulu  event 
 Image:Anna CAPPELLINI Luca LANOTTE 2009WC - CD.jpg thumb|230px|right|Ice dancing: Luca Lanotte & Anna Cappellini do the Paso doble on ice. 
 File:AdeleFred1921.jpg right|thumb|230px|Fred and Adele  Fred Astaire Astaire  in 1921 

 Dance  is when people move to a  music al  rhythm . They may be alone, or in a group. The dance may be an informal  Play (theatre) play , a part of a  ritual , or a part of a  professional   performance . There are many kinds of dances, and every human  society  has its own dances.

Dancing is not a sport, though it does have some athletic aspects. Dance is an art. Some people dance to express their feelings and  emotion s. Other people dance to feel better. Dance can be used to tell a story. In some societies, dance goes with  song  as well as music. People who want to learn to dance can go to dance schools. It may take years of practice to become an experienced and flexible dancer.

To plan a dance is called  choreography , done by a  choreographer . ref Crane Debra & Mackrell, Judith 2000.  The Oxford Dictionary of Dance . Oxford University Press, Oxford. [this book only deals with ballet] ref  Often this goes with  music , and fits into a certain style. Dances may be planned in detail, or they may be whatever dancers feel like doing. However, most dancing does follow some general style or  pattern . One style is the couple dance, where (usually) a man and a woman dance together. Other dances need a whole group of people together to make it work.

  History   

People have always danced. Every society has its own dances. There are pictures, on  pottery  and  stone , which show dances from several thousand years ago, in  Egypt  and  Greece . ref name Sachs Sachs, Curt 1937.  The world history of the dance . Norton, N.Y.  ref sup Chapter5 sup 

Sachs divides early dances into 'Imageless dances' and 'Image dances'. By 'imageless dances' he meant dances which have no set form, but aim at getting the dancers into a state of  Ecstasy (emotion) ecstasy . In this state the dancer(s) seem changed, in a  trance , and are often thought of (by their society) as being 'possessed by  spirits '. These dances are done on certain occasions: marriage, war, famine, illness or death, and so on. They are found in all early ('primitive') societies. ref name Sachs sup p49; 62 sup 

The 'image dances', according to Sachs, are to do with the world outside the dancer. By imitating an animal or object, the dancer believes he can capture a power and make it useful. To dance in imitation of the animal which is going to be hunted is to become one with them. To imitate the act of  sex  is to achieve  fertility . This is the kind of thinking behind an image dance. Sachs points out that societies of this kind do not really understand the connection between  Causality cause and effect . They really believe the image dances work. The dance type which is used in image dances is  mime . ref name Sachs sup p49; 77 sup 

The two styles of dance may be joined together. Fertility dances may involve both ecstatic states and mime. The great dancer  Nijinsky  used some of these ideas in his  choreography  for the  ballet   Le Sacre du Printemps  (The Rite of Spring), a ballet about the sacrifice of a girl during a primitive celebration of Spring.

Coming to more recent times, the first dance school we know about was opened in 1661 in  Paris . Only men were accepted until 1681. After 1681, women were accepted too.  Ballroom dance s are forms of modern dance. Ballroom dances such as the  Waltz (International) waltz  are done by couples.

Until the 20th century, most ballroom dances were  sequence dance s. The way people moved was planned in set formation. These formations were usually lines or squares. Everyone moved at the same time, and finished at the same time. The music played for a set time, and then stopped. After the invention of the  Waltz (International) waltz , around 1800, another style of dancing developed. ref Wood, Melusine 1952.  Historical dances: 12th to 19th centuries . Dance Books, London. ref  In the waltz, and later dances, people danced in couples, but they did so separately. They did not dance in formation, but moved round the room as they pleased (but anti-clockwise). Often, new dance styles arrive. Some dance as individuals, separately, as they please.  Street dance  is like that. All these types of dance have music.

At the same time, round the world there are many traditional dances. Some of them have been going for hundreds of years. We call them  folklore folkloric  dances.

The coming of popular  music video s and  DVD s led to a kind of dancer previously seen in some  stage (theatre) stage  shows. A  backup dancer  (or background dancer)  is a performer who dances with or behind the lead performers in a live musical act or in a music video. ref name www.tele Cite web  first Will  last Storr  title   The truth about life as a background dancer  url    http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/dance/8554651/The-truth-about-life-as-a-background-dancer.html    work   The  Telegraph   date   5 June 2011   accessdate   13 June 2013  ref 

  Styles  
 File:1991-Silje Studio 11ar.jpg thumb|220px|Ballet: Silje does an arabesque (by her father, Frode Inge Helland) 
There are many different styles of dance, which fall into these general types:
 Image:Ballroom dance competition cha cha 3.jpg thumb|right|220px|Young couple dancing at a junior Latin dance competition. 
 Professional dancing
 Ballet 
 Modern dance 
 Theatre  dance
 Belly dancing 
 Jazz dance 
 Tap dance 

 Social dancing
 Ballroom dancing  (International style) 
 Waltz (International) Waltz 
 Foxtrot 
 Tango 
 Quickstep 
 Viennese waltz 
 Cha-cha-cha 
 Jive (dance) Jive 
 Paso doble 
 Samba 
 Rumba 
 Other styles
 Salsa 
 Rock and Roll 
 Street dance 
 Breakdancing 
 Funk 
 Hip hop 

 Folk dance
 Irish Dance 
 Morris Dance 
 Country Dance 

 Indian Classical Dances 
 Bharat Natyam 
 Kathak 
 Mohini Attam 
 Kathakali 
 Kuchipudi 

  Professional dancers  
 Alvin Ailey  
 George Balanchine 
 Vernon and Irene Castle 
 Misty Copeland 
 Katherine Dunham 
 Bob Fosse 
 Loie Fuller 
 Gene Kelly 
 Vaslav Nijinsky 
 Margot Fonteyn 
 Monsieur Pierre 
 Antonio Ruiz Soler 

  References  
 commonscat Dance 
 Reflist 

 - 
 Dance 

 Category:Dance   
 Category:Non-verbal communication 

