Propaganda

File:Guerre_14-18-Humour-L'ingordo,_trop_dur-1915.JPG thumb|French Postcard  ndash  French Military Humour Propaganda : The Ingordo, from 1915. 
 Propaganda  is a form of communication to distribute information. It is always  bias ed. The information is  design ed to make people feel a certain way or to believe a certain thing. The information is often  political . 

It is hard to tell whether the information is true or false. Very often, the information is confusing and unfair. Propaganda does tend to make  dispute s last longer, and be more difficult to resolve.

The word 'propaganda' comes from  Latin language Latin . At first, it meant 'ideas to be spread around'. But in the  World War I First World War , it came to mean 'political ideas that are supposed to be misleading'.

Propaganda is like  advertising  in some ways. For example, it uses the  mass media  to spread its ideas. But advertising is usually trying  Sales to sell  something, whereas propaganda is about ideas. It is often political, and used by states or political parties, not private companies.

Propaganda is often used during wars. There it can be very useful. It can take the form of  poster s,  Television TV  advertisements, and  radio  announcements. Sometimes it keeps the people of a country happy  ndash  telling them that their country is fighting well and telling them how important it is that the  enemy  is defeated. Sometimes it tries to make people hate the enemy. The information could tell people that the enemy is  evil  or make them seem not human. Sometimes a  government  gives propaganda to the enemy  ndash  telling them that the war is going badly for them and that they should stop fighting.

When a country is not at war, propaganda can still be used. The government may use propaganda to change what people think about a political situation. A group may try to change the way people act towards an  Issue (debate) issue .

Propaganda under some countries, like dictatorships, is used along with  censorship . While propaganda tries to give people false ideas, censorship forces the ones who disagree with propaganda to keep quiet. Then the propaganda can say everything, because nobody can question it in public.

Propaganda is also used to win people by tricking them. Some people say that  cult s use propaganda to get people to join them.

 Examples of propaganda: 
   United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland British  propaganda against  Germany  in the  World War I First World War .
   Nazi Germany German  propaganda against  Poland  to start the  World War II Second World War , see  Attack on Sender Gleiwitz 
  Propaganda through mass media ( print ,  radio  and  film ) was used by the  Soviet Union  from beginning to end. Some great artists, like  Sergei Eisenstein  and  El Lissitzky , helped them do it. Many others, such as  Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn Solzhenitsyn , did not.

  History  
Propaganda has been used in every known civilisation. It was used by  Rameses II  on his monuments in  Ancient Egypt ; it was used by  Ancient Greek   orator s; it was used by  Julius Caesar , and all  Roman Emperor s. The word itself is formed from  propagate , meaning to multiply.

Propaganda was carried much further  by the  Sacra Congregatio de Propaganda Fide  of the  Catholic Church . ref Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith ref  This committee, founded in 1622 by  Pope Gregory XV , had action branches in most  Europe European  countries. These were the local branches of the  Inquisition , which sought out  heretic s. With  torture  and the threat of death by burning at the stake, they forced heretics to recant (to publicly withdraw their previous beliefs). The objective was to remove all challenges to the supremacy of the Church in matters of  belief . The 1578 handbook for inquisitors noted  "Punishment does not take place primarily and for the correction and good of the person punished, but for the public good in order that others may become terrified and weaned away from the evils they would commit". ref Directorium Inquisitorum , edition of 1578, Book 3, pg. 137, column 1. Online in the  http://dlxs2.library.cornell.edu/cgi/t/text/pageviewer-idx?c=witch;cc=witch;q1=terre%2A;rgn=full%20text;idno=wit045;didno=wit045;view=image;seq=00000563 Cornell University Collection ; retrieved 2008-05-16. ref 

  References  
 Reflist 

 Category:Politics 
 Category:Communication 
 Category:Psychology