Philosophy

File:Socrates Louvre.jpg thumb|Portrait of Socrates, a Roman copy from a Greek  statue ,  Louvre  museum 

 Philosophy  is a way of thinking about the  world , the  universe , and  society . It works by asking very basic questions about the nature of human thought, the nature of the universe, and the connections between them. The ideas in philosophy are often general and  wikt:abstract abstract . But this does not mean that philosophy is not about the real world.  Ethics , for example, asks what are the ideas underlying our everyday lives.  Metaphysics  asks about how the world works and of what it is made.

Sometimes people talk about how they have a "personal philosophy", which means the way a person thinks about the world. This article is  not  about people's "personal philosophies". This article is about the ideas that have discussed by  philosopher s (people who think and write about ways of thinking) for a long time. 

One philosophical question is this: "Is there any knowledge in the world which is so certain that no reasonable man could doubt it?". ref Bertrand Russell Russell, Bertrand  1912.  The problems of philosophy . Home University Library. ref  Other questions asked by philosophers are these: 

  What is  Goodness good ?
  What is  beauty ?
  Do we have  free will ?
  Does  God  exist?
  Does the  world  around us  existence exist ?
  What is a  person ?
  What is  truth ? 
  What is  evil ?
  What is the  relationship  between  mind  and  body ?
  What is  science ? 
  What is  philosophy ?
  What is  love ?

  History  
The word "philosophy" comes from two  Greek language Greek  words, meaning "love of wisdom". philos adj. "beloved" + sophia fem. noun " wisdom ".

There are different types of philosophy from different times and places. Some philosophers came from  Ancient Greece , such as  Plato  and  Aristotle . Others came from Asia, such as  Confucius  or  Gautama Buddha Buddha . Some philosophers are from the  Middle Ages  in Europe, such as  William of Ockham  or  Saint Thomas Aquinas . 

Philosophers from the 1600s, 1700s, and 1800s included  Thomas Hobbes ,  Rene Descartes ,  John Locke ,  David Hume , and  Immanuel Kant . Philosophers from the 1900s included  Ludwig Wittgenstein  and  Jean-Paul Sartre .

  Areas of inquiry  
 Philosophy  is the study of  human s and the  world  by thinking and asking questions. It is a science and an  art . Philosophy tries to answer important questions by coming up with answers about real things and asking "why?"

Sometimes, philosophy tries to answer the same questions as  religion  and  science . Philosophers do not all give the same answers to questions. Some people think there are no right answers in philosophy, only better answers and worse answers. Many types of philosophy criticize or even attack the beliefs of science and religion. 

In his work  Critique of Pure Reason ,   Immanuel Kant  asked the following questions: ref Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, II 2 2 ref 
 What can I say? 
 What shall I do?
 What dare I hope?
 What is man?
The answers to these questions gives the different domains or categories of philosophy.

  Categories in philosophy  
Philosophy can be divided into different groups, based on the types of questions that it asks. Below is a list of questions split into groups. One possible list of answers to these questions can be called a 'philosophy'. There are many different 'philosophies', because all of these questions have many different answers according to different people. Not all philosophies ask the same questions. These are the questions that are usually asked by philosophers from the  Western world :

 Metaphysics :

Metaphysics is sometimes split up into  ontology  (the philosophy of real life and living things), the  philosophy of mind  and the  philosophy of religion ; but these sub-branches are very close together.

 Ontology :
  What is the world that we see around us? (What is  reality ?)
  Is there more to the world than just what we see or hear? 
  If nobody sees something happening, does that mean that it did not happen?
  What does it mean to say that something is possible? Do other worlds exist?
  Is there anything very special about being a  human being  or being  life alive  at all?
  If not, why do some people think that there is?
  What is  Space (physics) space ? What is  time ?

 The philosophy of mind :
  What is a  mind ?
  What is a  body ?
  What is  consciousness ?
  Do people make choices, or can they only choose to do one thing? (Do people have  free will ?)
  What makes words or ideas meaningful? (What is the relation between meaningful words or ideas and the things that they mean?)

 The philosophy of religion :
  Do people have  soul s?
  Is there a  God  who created the Universe?

 In  epistemology :

  What is  knowledge ? 
  How can we know anything?
  What is  science ?
  What is  truth ?

 In  ethics :
  What are right and wrong, good and bad?
  Should people do some things and not others?
  What is  :wikt:justice justice ?

 In  aesthetics :
  What is  beauty ? What if one person thinks a painting is beautiful, but another person thinks the painting is ugly? Can the painting be beautiful and ugly at the same time?
  Are  truth true  things beautiful?
  Are  goodness good  things beautiful?
  What is  art ? We commonly think that a  sculpture  in a  museum  is art. If a sculptor sculpts a sculpture of a rock from clay, and puts it in a museum, many would call it art. But what if a person picks up a rock from the ground - is the rock a piece of art?

 In  logic :
  What do the words we use mean?
  How can we say things (especially  idea s) in a way that only has one meaning?
  Can all ideas be expressed using  language ?
  How does the  truth  of an  argument 's  premise  affect the truth of its conclusion?
  How can we reason correctly? 

 In  axiology :
  What has value?
  Is time really money? or have we made it so?
  Does love, beauty, or justice hold any value?

Other divisions include  eschatology ,  teleology  and  theology . In past centuries natural  science  was included in philosophy, and called "natural philosophy".

  Is philosophy good or bad?  
Does philosophy do any good? Very few people would dispute this. It is easy to argue that philosophy is a good thing, because it helps people to think more clearly. Philosophy helps people to understand the world and the way people act and think. Philosophers believe that asking philosophical questions is useful because it brings  wisdom  and helps people to learn about the world and each other. Some philosophers might even argue that the question "Is philosophy good or bad?" is a philosophical question itself.

However, some people think that philosophy is harmful, as philosophy encourages free-thinking and often questions the beliefs that others hold. For example, philosophies such as some  existentialist  views say that there is no meaning to life or human existence, except the meaning that we make up or invent. People from some religions do not agree with the beliefs of existentialism.

It should be noted that every major science, including physics, biology, and chemistry are all disciplines that originally were considered philosophy. As speculation and analysis about nature became more developed, these subjects branched away. This is a process that continues even today; psychology only split in the past century. In our own time, subjects such as consciousness studies, decision theory, and applied ethics have increasingly found independence from philosophy as a whole. Because of this, philosophy seems useful because it makes new kinds of science.

  What philosophers do  
Philosophers ask questions about ideas ( concepts ). They try to find answers to those questions. Some thinkers find it very hard to find those words that best describe the ideas they have. When they find answers to some of these questions philosophers often have the same problem, that is how to best tell the answers they found to other people. Depending on the meaning of the words they use, the answers change. 

Some philosophers are full-time thinkers (called academics), who work for universities or colleges. These philosophers write books and articles about philosophy and teach classes about philosophy to university or college students.

Other philosophers are just " hobby " thinkers who think about philosophy during their free time. A small number of hobby thinkers have thought so much about philosophy that they are able to write articles for philosophy magazines. Other people approach philosophy from another job. For example  monk s,  artist s, and  scientist s may think about philosophical ideas and questions.

Most philosophers work by asking questions and looking for good definitions (meanings) of words to help them understand what a question means.

Some philosophers say the only thing needed to answer a question is to find out what it means. The only thing that makes philosophical questions (such as those above) difficult is that people do not really know what they mean  Ludwig Wittgenstein  held this view.

Philosophers often use both real and imaginary examples to make a point. For example, they may write about a real or fictional person in order to show what they think a good person or a bad person is like.

Some philosophers look for the simplest way to answer a question and say that is probably the right answer. This is a process called  Occam's razor . Others believe that complicated answers to questions can also be right. For an example of a philosophical problem, see the  God paradox .

Philosophers use  logic  to solve problems and answer questions. Logical  consistency  is a cornerstone of any acceptable theory. Philosophers who disagree with a theory will often try to find a logical  contradiction  in a theory. If they find a contradiction, this gives them a reason to reject that theory. If they do not find an inconsistency, the philosopher might show that the theory leads to a conclusion which is either unacceptable or ridiculous. This second approach is usually called  reductio ad absurdum .

  Some philosophers  
People listed here should be genuine philosophers, rather than social or political campaigners.

  The ancient  Ancient Greece Greek  philosophers  
   Aristotle 
   Epicurus 
   Heraclitus 
   Plato 
   Pythagoras 
   Socrates 

  Later  Europe an/western philosophers  
   Saint Augustine 
   Canonization Saint   Thomas Aquinas 
   Duns Scotus 
   Bonaventure 
   William of Ockham 
   George Berkeley 
   Auguste Comte 
   Rene Descartes 
   Ralph Waldo Emerson 
   Friedrich Engels 
   Georg Wilhelm Frederich Hegel 
   Thomas Hobbes 
   David Hume 
   Immanuel Kant 
   Soren Kierkegaard 
   Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz 
   John Locke 
   Niccolo Machiavelli 
   John Stuart Mill 
   Friedrich Nietzsche 
   Jean-Jacques Rousseau 
   Arthur Schopenhauer 
   Baruch Spinoza 
   William Whewell 

  Modern European and  United States American  philosophers  
   Louis Althusser 
   Simone de Beauvoir 
   David Chalmers 
   Christian DeQuincey 
   Michel Foucault 
   Martin Heidegger 
   Karl Popper 
   John Rawls 
   Bertrand Russell 
   Jean-Paul Sartre 
   Ludwig Wittgenstein 

   Asian /eastern philosophers  
   Avicenna 
   Osho 
   Confucius 
   Gautama Buddha Siddharta Gautama  (the Gautama Buddha)
   Omar Khayyam 
   Nanak 
   Chuang Tzu 
   Lao Tzu 
   Sohrevardi 

  References  
 Reflist 

  Other websites  
   http://en.citizendium.org/wiki/Philosophy Philosophy  Citizendium

 Category:Philosophy