Weapon

File:Armi primitive - Brendola.JPG thumb|right|250px| Center Primitive weapons 
A  weapon  is an  wikt:object object  that can be used to attack or  injury injure  a person or  animal . People have used weapons since very  wikt:ancient ancient  times. While other  animal s use weapons, in most cases they are  wikt:attach attach ed to the animal ( teeth ,  claw s,  tusk s, etc.). ref name OConnell14 Robert L. O'Connell,  Of Arms and Men : A History of War, Weapons, and Aggression  (Oxford; New York: University of Oxford, 1989), p. 14 ref  In man's case they are detached and constantly selected for the  wikt:purpose purpose  at hand. ref name OConnell14  Man has been constantly  wikt:develop develop ing newer and better weapons ever since he picked up the first  rock . ref Chris McNab,  A History of the World in 100 Weapons  (Botley, Oxford; Long Island City, NY: Osprey Publishing, 2011), p. 5 ref 

  History  
  File:Middelaldersvaerd.jpg thumb|left|90px| Center Medieval  swords 
Some of the oldest remains that we have of ancient people are weapons made of  stone . Ancient people also used  spear s.  Bow (weapon) Bows and arrows  were in use by about 20,000  BC . ref cite web  url https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn17423-timeline-weapons-technology/   title Timeline: Weapons technology  author   date   website   publisher New Scientist  accessdate 31 October 2015 ref  During the  Bronze age  people learned to make things of  metal , many people used  sword s. People also built huge machines which could throw rocks to destroy the  defensive wall s of enemy cities. Some of these machines were called  catapult s or  siege engine s. Later,  gunpowder  was invented in  China  and the  Europe ans began using it to make  gun s and  cannon s. These weapons were much better than the older weapons, and helped the Europeans to conquer people in many parts of the  world . People in many parts of the world used guns such as  rifle s and  shotgun s for  hunting  animals, and  pistol handguns  for shooting other people.
 
People continued to invent new weapons. In 1884 the  machine gun  was invented, which could shoot many  bullet s very fast.  Soldier s began to use  land mine s, a bomb hidden in the ground, which  explosion explodes  when someone walks on it.  Small  submarine s were able to use  torpedo s to attack bigger ships and hide under the ocean.  When  fixed-wing aircraft airplanes  were invented, people began to use them to shoot enemies and to drop  bomb s on them. They built  tank s which had big guns and strong  armour armor .   Poison gas  was used in  World War I  but was outlawed and rarely used afterwards. 

In  World War II , cities were heavily bombed from the air and  Nazi Germany  used  V-2  missiles to carry bombs to  England . Both sides used many  firebomb s. At the end of World War II, the  United States  used  Nuclear weapon atomic bombs  (nuclear bombs) to destroy the  Japan ese cities of  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki . 
  File:Maximgun.jpg thumb|right|150px| Center A Maxim machine gun from the 1890s 
After World War II, people continued to develop new weapons, including  intercontinental ballistic missile s. People became concerned about  weapon of mass destruction weapons of mass destruction , weapons that can kill many people very fast, and are usually cheap and easy to make and use. One kind of weapon of mass destruction is  poison gas . New kinds of poison gas, such as  nerve agent nerve gas , are much more powerful than the old kinds. Another kind of weapon of mass destruction is  Biological warfare disease germs , which could be used to make many people sick and maybe kill them.  

  Laws   
Old-fashioned weapons still kill many people in wars and fighting. In wars in  Africa  in the 1990s and early 21st century, many people were killed with  machete s (big knives). People sometimes try to make  law s,  treaty treaties , and  international   agreement s to try to control weapons because they are worried about all the killing done with them. Laws vary from country to country, for example, in the  United States , the "right to keep and bear arms" is guaranteed to all  citizenship citizens  by the  United States Constitution Constitution . A country may say that people in that country cannot keep or use guns, or only when the  government  allows it. The  laws of war  forbid certain weapons, and countries may agree with each other that they should not use certain weapons against each other, or should not have more than a certain number of particular kinds of weapons. 

  Types of weapons  
Things specifically made as weapons that most ordinary people can carry, include non lethal:
   Pepper spray  or  tear gas 
   Electricity electric  shocking devices

Weapons that  army soldiers  or  police  personnel carry, include:
  Portable  gun firearms  like  pistol s,  rifle s, and  shotgun s
 Portable firearms are also used by for  hunting  and for marksmanship practice. 
  Some types of  stick s
   Sword s and most types of  knife knives 

Weapons that the  defense (military) defense  people of a  nation al government have, include:
   Explosive material Explosive   bomb s of any type,  hand grenade grenades 
   Rocket s for carrying bombs
   Boat s,  vehicle s, and  aircraft  with attached firearms, such as  warship s,  tank s, and  fighter aircraft fighter  and  bomber  aircraft.

Other types of weapons include:
   Sling (weapon) Sling 
   slingshot 
   Spear 
   Bow (weapon) Bow  and  arrow 
   Germ s and materials containing them

 Related pages 
   Commons category-inline Weapons 
   War 

  References  
 reflist 

 Category:Weapons  