Architecture

File:Santuario de Las Lajas, Ipiales, Colombia, 2015-07-21, DD 21-23 HDR-Edit.JPG thumb|right|300px|Santuario de Las Lajas, Ipiales,  Colombia 
 File:Parthenon.JPG thumb|right|The Parthenon in  Greece  uses columns all made in stone 

 Architecture  is the  science  of the  design  of  structure s or  building s such as houses, places of worship, and office buildings.  Architecture is also the  profession  of an  architect . A person must  wikt:study study  at an  institution  of  higher education  (university) to become an  architect . ref 
 cite web
 url http://www.architecture.com/EducationAndCareers/BecomingAnArchitect/Becominganarchitect.aspx 
 title Becoming an architect
 publisher www.architecture.com
 accessdate 2009-03-25
 last 
 first 
 
 ref  Architecture can be about small designs, such as a  garage , or large designs, such as a whole  city . Architecture often overlaps with  civil engineering , and architects and civil engineers often work together.

__TOC__

  History  
 File:Saint Leonardo vault.PNG thumb|Romanesque groin vault 
In the past, people built  wikt:hut hut s and wood  house s to protect themselves from the weather. For safety, they were often close together. Great  civilization s like the  Ancient Egypt ians built large  temples  and structures, like the  Great Pyramids of Giza . The  Ancient Greek s and  Ancient Rome Roman s made what we now call  Classical Architecture "Classical Architecture" . The Romans, working over 2000 years ago, copied the  arch  from the  Etruscans , who copied it from the  Mesopotamia ns. The  stone   column s, which still hold up so many important buildings, like the  Parthenon  in  Athens , were simply copied from the first wooden posts.

 File:Former post office in Nemti.jpg thumb|A simpler building, in  Hungary 
 Classical Architecture  was very formal, and it always obeyed  laws . It used  symmetry , which really means  wikt:simple:balance balance , and it used  proportion  which means keeping shapes in certain ways. The  Golden ratio Golden Mean  was a rule (or law) which said, (to put it very simply) if you are making a room, or any other thing, it will work best if you always make the long side 1.6 times longer than the short side. There are many laws in Classical Architecture, like how high the middle of an arched  bridge  needs to be (which depends on how wide the bridge needs to be). These laws were learned from thousands of  year s of experience and they are as true today as they were 2000 years ago.

In some parts of the world, like  India , the architecture is famous for  carving  the stone on temples and palaces. Different architectural styles were made in  China ,  Japan , Southeast Asia,  Africa ,  Mexico , and Central and  South America .

Later, people in  Western Europe  in the  Middle Ages  made  Romanesque architecture , then  Gothic architecture .  Gothic buildings have tall, pointed  window s and arches.  Many  church es have Gothic architecture.  Castle s were also built at this time. In  Eastern Europe , churches usually had  dome s. People added their own ideas and  decoration  to the Classical Architecture of the past.  The  Renaissance  brought a return to classical ideas. 
 File:NYC - Guggenheim Museum.jpg thumb|left|Architecture can have many styles, such as the curved  Guggenheim Museum  in  New York City 
In the late 18th century with the  Industrial Revolution , people began to  invent  machines to make things quickly and cheaply. Many  factory factories  and  Mill (factory) mills  were built during, or after this revolution. Decades later, in the  Victorian era , architects like  George Fowler Jones  and  Decimus Burton  still followed the Gothic style to build new churches. Up to this point, buildings were limited in size and style by the strength of the wood and  masonry  used to construct them. Gothic cathedrals were among the largest buildings because the gothic arch when combined with buttresses allowed stone buildings to be built taller. For example, the cathedral in  Ulm , Germany is over 500 feet tall. However, building with stone has its limits, and building too tall could result in collapse, an example of which is the  Beauvais Cathedral , which was never completed. 
 File:Sears Tower ss.jpg thumb|New technology allows new kinds of buildings such as for the  Willis Tower  in  Chicago 

Towards the end of the 19th Century with a second Industrial Revolution,  steel  became much cheaper. Architects began to use inventions like metal girders and  reinforced concrete  to build. An example is the  Eiffel Tower  in  Paris . Buildings can now be built taller than ever before. We call them  skyscrapers . This new  technology  has made us free from traditional limitations, and because of the new possibilities presented by these materials, many traditional methods of construction and ideas about style were reevaluated, replaced, or abandoned. Cheap, strong glass soon brought transparent exterior walls, especially for office buildings.

 Modernism  is the name for the architectural style which developed because of these new building technologies, and its beginnings can been seen as early as 1890. Modernism can also refer to a specific group of architects and buildings from the early to late 20th century, and so may not be the proper term to use for many building built since then, which are sometimes called "post-modern".

Many of the world's greatest structures were built by modern-day architects such as  Frank Lloyd Wright ,  I. M. Pei ,  Adrian Smith (architect) Adrian Smith ,  Edward Durell Stone ,  Fazlur Khan , and  Bruce Graham .

  Related pages  
   Architect 
   Art 
   List of buildings 
   Skyscraper 
   Structural Engineering 
   Acoustics 
   Building code 
   Building materials 
   Pattern language 
   World Heritage Site s

  References  
 reflist 

 Other websites 
 commonscat 
   http://www.aia.org/index.htm American Institute of Architects 
   http://www.architecture.com.au/ Australian Institute of Architects 
   http://www.architecture.com/Home.aspx Royal Institute of British Architects 
   http://www.raic.org/ Royal Architectural Institute of Canada 
   http://www.nzia.co.nz/ New Zealand Institute of Architects 
   http://en.citizendium.org/wiki/Architecture Architecture  Citizendium

 Category:Architecture   
 Category:Construction