Nature

File:Hopetoun falls.jpg thumb|230px| Hopetoun Falls ,  Australia 

 File:Galunggung.jpg thumb|right|300px| Lightning  strikes during the eruption of the  Galunggung   volcano ,  West Java , in 1982. 

The words  nature  and  natural  are used for all the things that are normally not made by  human s. Things like  weather ,  organisms ,  landform s,  celestial bodies  and much more are part of nature.  Scientist s study the way the parts of nature work. Things that have been made by people are said to be  man-made  or called  Artifact (archaeology) artifacts .

There are  natural sciences  that study different parts of nature, for example the science of  ecology  is about plants and animals as a whole, while  biology  studies every type of living thing.

From one point of view, humans are a prime example of nature, and are the most widely studied natural inhabitants of the planet earth. Humans interact with each other in their natural environment on a constant basis. Every part of nature  ndash  everything from the air to the dirt on the ground  ndash  is interdependent.  Medicine  studies humans in health and sickness. 

From another point of view, humans and nature can be said to be in  conflict . Nature is often seen by humans as  natural resource s. People cut down trees to get  wood  to burn, to build  house s, or to make a place to grow food.  Fire s,  car s, and  factories  make a lot of smoke and harm many places. People who like to leave nature unharmed and those who feel they need to use more of nature often fight about what they should do. In the modern world, with many more people and many big cities, these problems are becoming more serious.

Nature, in the broadest sense, means the physical world as a whole. This is the meaning that  physics , the study of nature (etymologically), takes.

  Natural  
A useful definition of  natural  is 
 "Happening or operating in accordance with the ordinary course of nature".  Oxford Shorter English Dictionary  says the word in this sense is first found in 1477.

 Related pages 
 Creation 

  Other websites  
 wiktionary nature 
 commonscat-inline 


 sci-stub 

 Category:Nature   
 Category:Bionics