Christian

otheruses 
 File:Famous Christians around the world.jpg right|thumb|200px|Set of pictures for a number of famous Christians from various fields 
A  Christian   audio En-us-Christian.ogg  is a  Human person  who believes in  Christianity , a  Monotheism monotheistic   religion . Christianity is mostly about the  life  and  teach ings of  Jesus Christ , in the  New Testament ref name bbc.co.uk cite web  url http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/christianity/   title BBC - Religion & Ethics - Christianity   accessdate 2008-07-11  format   work BBC ref  and  Interpretation interpreted  of  Prophecy prophesied  in the  Hebrew Bible / Old Testament . ref cite web  url http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?book_id=29&chapter=53&version=31   title Book of Isaiah, Chapter 53   accessdate 2008-07-11  format   work   ref   Christianity is the world's largest religion, with 2.1 billion followers around the world. ref name bbc.co.uk  The Quran states that true Christians should love Muslims; "And thou wilt find the nearest of them in affection to those who believe (to be) those who say: Lo! We are Christians." ref Qur'an, Sura 5 (Al-Ma'ida), ayat 82-85 ref 

Christians consider the Holy Bible to be a sacred book, inspired by God.  The Holy Bible is a combination of the Hebrew Bible, or Torah, and a collection of writings called the New Testament.  Views on the importance of these writings vary.  Some Christian groups prefer to favor the New Testament, while others believe the entire Bible is equally important.  Also, while many Christians prefer to consider the Bible as true, inspired by God, not all groups believe that it is completely accurate.  Some of these groups may think that the Bible is a collection of stories meant to show who God is, or even just the opinions of humans that reveal some commonly-believed truth. fact date February 2010 

The issue of "who is a Christian?" can be very controversial.  Christians often disagree over this issue due to their differences in opinion on spiritual matters. It is not possible to provide a statement that all readers may agree with, therefore, a definition will not be provided.  Even very traditional doctrines such as the belief that Jesus Christ is God, or that God consists of the Father, Son, and Spirit, are not common to people who claim Christianity as their religion.  fact date August 2014 

Many Christians choose to go to church. Most Christians believe this to be a sign of their religious devotion to God and an act of worship.  However, some Christian groups think that one can be a Christian without ever going to a church.  Though there are many different viewpoints on the issue, most Protestants believe all Christians are part of the spiritual church of Christ, whether or not those Christians go to an actual church each week.  On the other hand,  Catholic s believe that the Holy Catholic Church is the only true church.

In some Christian movements (especially  Fundamentalism  and  Evangelicalism ), to be a  born-again Christian  is to undergo a " Spiritualism spiritual rebirth " 

 Related pages 
   Christianity 
   Religion 
   Salvation 

  References  
 reflist 

 Category:Christians  