Volcanism

Image:Tectonic plate boundaries.png thumb|right|450px|Three types of plate boundary 

 Volcanism  (or  vulcan activity ) is the  Volcanic eruption eruption  of  magma  onto the surface of the Earth. 

Magma under the  crust (geology) crust  is under very great pressure. When  Fold (geology) folding  and  faulting  occur, cracks or fractures appear. These are lines of weakness. When these lines of weakness develop downward in the crust and reach the magma, they will release the pressure in the magma. This allows magma to rise up along the lines of weakness and intrude into the crust. Some magma may even reach the Earth's surface.

  Volcanoes  
 main Volcano 
Volcanoes are places where magma reaches the earth's surface. The type of volcano depends on the location of the eruption and the consistency of the magma.

  Intrusions  
 File:Devils Tower 18A.JPG right|thumbnail|250px|The main feature of the  Devils Tower National Monument  was created via intrusion. 
 main Intrusion 
Intrusive volcanism is when magma is forced into the rocks that make up the Earth's crust.   When it cools and become solid while still underground, different features called  pluton s are formed. The rock formed is intrusive  igneous rock .

These plutons will be exposed at the surface of land when the overlying rocks are removed after a long time of  denudation  (laid bare by erosion).

Major features formed by intrusive volcanicity include: batholith, laccolith, dyke, pipe and sill.
  Batholiths: Have large scale magma that has been solidified at the base of the mountain.
  Dyke: Is a small scale magma cooled within the earths crust that stands vertically to the existing rocks.
  Sill: Is small scale magma cooled near the earths surface that lies horizontally to the existing rocks.
  Lacolith: A small scale magma that pushes the overlying layers of rocks to form a dome shaped structure.

  Extrusions  
The molten magma under great pressure forces its way through the fissure of underground rocks and reaches the Earth's surface to form "igneous extrusion". 
Major extruded materials include  gas ,  liquid  and  solid .

   Gas  -  sulphur ,  hydrogen ,  carbon dioxide  and  hot steam  ( geysers ). When uprising magma decreases in pressure suddenly, gases within magma explode to the Earth's surface and cause destruction.
   Solid  -  pyroclast . Mainly composed of: country rock, ref meaning the rock native to an area ref  fragments of solidified  lava  and fine materials (volcanic  ash  and dust). It can be classified by size into volcanic bombs, volcanic blocks,  lapilli , volcanic ash and volcanic dust. 
   Liquid  -  lava ,  hot spring s.

Features formed are:
   Caldera : a large depression in a former volcanic site. When it is filled with water it is called a 'caldera lake'. 
  Composite cones: a large volcanic mountain formed by solidified lava on the surface.
   Geyser s: eruption of hot water and steam shooting into the air at regular intervals.
   Hot spring s: springs of hot water that flow out continuously without shooting up into the air.

  Notes  
 reflist 

  Other websites  
 Commons category 
   cite web
  url    http://www.d.umn.edu/~rmorton/ronshome/Volcanology/VolcanicGlossary.htm 
  title   Glossary of Volcanic Terms
  publisher   G. J. Hudak, University of Wisconsin Oshkosh, 2001
  accessdate   2010-05-07  

 Category:Volcanology