Vienna

File:Upper Belvedere LCD-toneedit2 NR.jpg thumb|right|400px|The Upper Belvedere Palace in Vienna 
 Infobox World Heritage Site
 WHS           Historic Centre of Vienna
 Image        
 State Party    AUT 
 Type          Cultural
 Criteria      ii, iv, vi
 ID            1033
 Region        Europe
 Year          2001
 Session      
 Link           http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1033 
 

 class infobox style font-size: 90% colspan 2 style background:#EFEFEF State Coat of Arms
 colspan 2 align center   File:Wien 3 Wappen.svg 150px| Coat of Arms  of the city/state of Vienna 
 colspan 2 style background:#EFEFEF General Information
  Country:
  Austria
  State Capital:
  Vienna
   ISO 3166-2:AT ISO 3166-2 :
  AT-9
   License plate Vehicle Registration :
  W
   Community Identification Number :
  90101-92301
   Postal code s:
  1010-1239, 1400, 1450
   Area code :
  01
  Homepage:
   http://www.wien.gv.at/ www.wien.gv.at 
 colspan 2 style background:#EFEFEF State Flag of Vienna
 colspan 2 align center   File:Wien Dienstflagge.PNG 200px|State  Flag  of the city/state of Vienna 
 colspan 2 style background:#EFEFEF Map: Vienna in Austria
 colspan 2 align center   File:Karte oesterreich wien.png 200px|Map of Austria (Vienna) 
 colspan 2 style background:#EFEFEF Politics
   List of mayors of Vienna Mayor  and  governor 
   Michael Haupl  ( SPO )
  Governing Parties
   SPO  and  GRUNE 
 valign top   Distribution of seats in the Austrian Landtagen Seats in the Municipal Council br (100 seats):
   SPO  44 br FPO  34<br/ > GRUNE  10 br OVP  7 br NEOS 5
 valign top  Last Election:
  October  2015 
 valign top  Next Election:
  October  2020 
 colspan 2 style background:#EFEFEF Population
 valign top   Population :
  1,840,573  small (1 January 2016)   ref name population http://www.wien.gv.at/statistik/daten/pdf/bev-uebersicht.pdf www.wien.gv.at/statistik ref small   br 2,680,667 metro area  (2014)
   Population density :
  4,437 km2
 colspan 2 style background:#EFEFEF Geography
   Area :
  414.87  Square kilometre km2 
  - percent land:
  395.57  Square kilometre km2  (95,3%)
  - percent water:
  19.30  Square kilometre km2  (4,7%)
 valign top   Geographic coordinate system Location :
   coor dm 48 13 N 16 22 E type:city(3390444)_region:AT-9 
 valign top  Dimensions:
  North-South: 22.4 km  br East-West: 29.2 km
 valign top  Highest Point:
  543 m br ( Hermannskogel )
 valign top  Lowest Point:
  151 m br ( Lobau )
 colspan 2 style background:#EFEFEF Administrative Structure
 valign top  Districts:
  1  Statutarstadt br 23  Bezirk e
 colspan 2 style background:#EFEFEF Map: Districts of Vienna
 colspan 2 align center   File:Wien districts with numbers.png 150px|Bezirke of Vienna 
 

 Vienna  ( German language German :  Wien ) is the  Capital (city) capital   city  of  Austria . 

It is in the east of the country on the  river   Danube . More than 1,800,000 people live there (2016). It is the largest city in Austria. It is also an administrative district ( Bundesland ) of its own. 

Before  World War I , it was the capital of the  Austro-Hungarian Empire . Its centre is a  World Heritage Site UNESCO World Heritage Site .
 History 
The history of the city goes back to the  Roman Empire . The Romans started a military camp called Vindobona. ref cite web  url   http://www.livius.org/vi-vr/vindobona/vindobona.html   title Vindobona (Vienna)  first   last   work livius.org  year 2011   accessdate 22 November 2011 ref  The camp was in today's first district on the  Danube  river. The name came from the  Celts , so there was probably a Celtic settlement before the Roman invasion. The Romans stayed until the 5th century. In  Middle Ages medieval times , the settlement was still in use. The present name was mentioned in 881 in the  Salzburg er Annalen, where a battle  ad weniam  is mentioned.

In 976 the House of Babenberg became rulers of the area. They made Vienna their capital in 1155. Vienna was already an important city. In 1156, Austria became a  Duchy , and Vienna was where the  Duke  who ruled the Duchy lived. In 1221, Vienna got municipal rights.  It Is the second oldest city in Austria ( Enns , in  Upper Austria , is the oldest).

In 1278, the Duchy came to the  Habsburg  family. Rudolf IV started the university in 1365 and while he was duke the nave of the Gothic St. Stephan's Cathedral was built. Quarrels within the Hapsburg family caused an economic decline in Vienna. In 1438, Vienna became the residence of the Holy Roman Emperor.

During the time of the  reformation  Vienna was a Protestant city, but in the times of the Counter Reformation, Austria and Vienna were mostly Roman Catholic.

In 1529, Vienna was first besieged by the army of the  Ottoman Empire , which had a border only 150 km east of Vienna. This hurt Vienna  economics economically , but led to people  fort ifying the city (making it stronger). After a second siege, the Ottoman Empire could not take Vienna, and the city started getting larger.

During the  Baroque baroque era , Vienna was rebuilt. Many residences for the nobility were built. Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach was an important architect in Vienna.

At the end of the 18th and the beginning of the 19th century Vienna was the home of important composers like  Joseph Haydn Haydn ,  Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart Mozart ,  Ludwig van Beethoven Beethoven ,  Franz Schubert Schubert .

After the revolution in 1848  Franz Joseph I of Austria Franz Joseph I.  became emperor of the  Austrian Empire , which was founded in 1806 after the liquidation of the Holy Roman Empire. He ruled till 1916. Vienna became a center of arts, culture and architecture. The city grew because the suburbs became part of the city. After 1858 the walls of the city were destroyed and the  Ringstrasse  replaced them. Along that street houses of the rich citizens were built, as were public buildings like the city hall and the Burg theatre. The industrialisation started at the beginning of the century and made more people live there. In 1870, Vienna had one million people, and in 1910, two million people. With the creation of a large working class and poverty in Vienna the Labour Party (Sozialdemokratische Arbeiterpartei) became stronger.

Karl Lueger was the most important mayor in the time of Emperor Franz Josef. During his time important community plans were realized that made Vienna a modern city. However, Lueger was a radical anti-Semite. He was admired by the young  Adolf Hitler , who spent some years before the First World War in Vienna. At this time, Vienna was an important place for the arts. Composers like  Arnold Schonberg ,  Anton Webern ,  Alban Berg  and  Ernst Krenek  were important for the development of modern music. Also the  psychoanalysis was founded in Vienna by Sigmund Freud. Also the so-called  Art Nouveau Jugendstil  in arts was part of Vienna's modern arts scene. Founding fathers of modern architecture lived and worked also in Vienna at this time ( Otto Wagner ,  Adolf Loos )

After the end of the  First World War  the Austrian-Hungary Empire was dissolved and Vienna became capital of the Republic of Austria. In 1938, Austria was occupied by Germany. In Vienna the suffering of the Jewish inhabitants began. A lot of their properties was given to Austrians (Arisierung). 

After the  Second World War , which destroyed 20% of Vienna's buildings, Vienna was divided into four parts. The city was controlled by the allies like the other parts of  Austria . In 1955 the state treaty between the allies and Austria was signed in Vienna's Belvedere. After that Vienna became an important city for international organisations. The first was 1957 the International Atomic Energy Organisation ( IAEO ) and 1965 the  OPEC  followed. 1980 the Vienna International Center was opened and Vienna is now the third  United Nations UN -city together with New York and Geneva.

 gallery 
 Wien - Romermuseum, Hypokaustum.JPG|Remains of the heating system in a Roman house in Vienna
 Wien - Stephansdom (1).JPG|St. Stephens cathedral
 Canaletto (I) 058.jpg|Vienna in the baroque era
 Wien Parlament um 1900.jpg|Ringstrasse and parliament around 1900
 Karl-Marx-Hof 2009.jpg| Karl-Marx-Hof is one of the best-known Gemeindebauten (municipal tenement complexes) in Vienna
 gallery 

  Districts  
There are 23 districts in Vienna. They are:

 
   Innere Stadt  (city centre)
   Leopoldstadt 
   Landstrasse 
   Wieden 
   Margareten 
   Mariahilf 
   Neubau 
   Josefstadt 
   Alsergrund 
   Favoriten 
   Simmering (Vienna) Simmering 
   Meidling 
   Hietzing 
   Penzing 
   Rudolfsheim-Funfhaus 
   Ottakring 
   Hernals 
   Wahring 
   Dobling 
   Brigittenau 
   Floridsdorf 
   Donaustadt 
   Liesing 
 
 Sightseeing 
Vienna has many things worth seeing. Here are a few of them.
 St. Stephen's cathedral and St. Stephen's Square: 
  Today St. Stephen's square with the cathedral is the very center of Vienna.The  Graben  and the  Karntner Strasse  which lead away from the square are shopping streets with a lot of different shops. Opposite the cathedral you can find the  Haas-House , a very modern building by architect Hans Hollein. 
 Ringstrasse: 
 The Ringstrasse runs around the first district and was built in the second half of the 19th century. The street follows the old city walls which were destroyed to create it Along the street you can find different important buildings like the  Staatsoper  (opera house), the  parliament , the  Burgtheater , the two museums of natural history and arts. Also the  Wiener Postsparkasse  which is an important building by the architect Otto Wagner is along the street.
 Hofburg: 
 From the 13th century to 1918 this was the residence of the Habsburg rulers. Today it is the residence of the President of the Republic of Austria and you can also visit different museums like the  Schatzkammer  where you can see the different crowns of the Habsburg family and the crown of the Holy Roman Empire. The  National Library  is also the Hofburg. 
 Schloss Schonbrunn: 
 Today's buildings were built by the architect Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach an important architect in the baroque era in Austria. Another building of Fischer is the  Karlskirche .
 Schloss Belvedere: 
 Schloss Belvedere was built by Johann Lucas von Hildebrandt  another important Austrian baroque architect. It was built for Prinz Eugen of Savoy who fouyght successfully against the Ottoman Empire. Today the castle is used as museum (Austrian Gallery Belvedere).

  Culture  
 File:Wien - Stephansdom (1).JPG upright|thumb|St. Stephan's Cathedral in Vienna is amongst the most famous buildings in Austria. 
There are many old buildings,  church es and  museum s in the city centre.  Classical music  and  opera  are popular in Vienna. The  composer s  Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart ,  Ludwig van Beethoven  and  Johannes Brahms Brahms  all worked in Vienna.  Antonio Vivaldi Vivaldi  also died in Vienna. The city has two world-famous orchestras: the  Vienna Philharmonic  and the  Vienna Symphony .

Vienna is also the name of a  song  about the city, by the  United Kingdom British  group Ultravox.

Vienna is the home of the nationally successful soccer clubs  SK Rapid Wien  and  FK Austria Wien .

  References  
 reflist 

  Other websites  
   http://wien.at/english/ Official Website of the city of Vienna (English) 
   http://wiki.worldflicks.org/vienna.html WorldFlicks in Vienna: Photos and interesting places on Google Maps 


 States of Austria 
 European capitals 
 WHSite 

 Category:Vienna   
 Category:World Heritage Sites in Europe 
 Category:Austrian state capitals