City

Image:Piazza del Campo (Siena).jpg thumb|250px|The medieval city of  Sienna  with its town square and magnificent  town hall . A modern  suburb  can be seen in the background. 
	
A  city  is a place where many people live together. 

A city has many  building s and  street s. It has houses or apartments for many people to live, shops where they may buy things, places for people to work and a  government   organisation  to run the city, and to keep  law  and  wikt:order order  in the city. People live in cities because it is easy for them to find and do the things they want there. A city usually has a "city centre" where government and  business  take place, and places called  suburb s where people live around the outside of the centre.

 Definition 
 File:Tirana Piazza Skanderbeg.JPG thumb|250x250px| Tirana , capital of  Albania 
There is no rule that is used all over the world to decide why some places are called "city" and other places are called "town". 

Some things that make a city are: 
  A long  history . Although many cities today have only been around for tens or hundreds of years, there are a few which have been so for thousands of years. For example,  Athens ,  Greece  was founded in 1000  BC  and  Rome ,  Italy  has existed since 700 BC.
  A large  population . Cities can have millions of people living in and around them. Among them is  Tokyo ,  Japan , and the  Tokyo Metropolis  around it, which includes  Yokohama  and  Chiba, Chiba Chiba .
  A centre where  business  and  government  takes place. The first case is often described as the  financial capital , such as  Frankfurt  in  Germany . The second case is true for different levels of government, whether they are  local government local  or part of a larger  region  (for example,  Atlanta ,  Georgia (state) Georgia , or an entire  country  (for example,  Washington, D.C. ). Cities which contain the government of the region it is in are called  capital city capitals . Almost every country has  List of national capitals its own capital .
  Special powers called  town privileges  which have been given by the government of the  country , or its ruler. This was done especially in  Europe  during the  Middle Ages .
  Having a cathedral or a  university . This rule is found in the United Kingdom. The smallest "cathedral cities" are  St. David's  and  St Asaph's  which are both in  Wales , and  Ripon  and  Wells  which are in  England .
 
In American English, people often call all places where many people live cities. ref In the USA, on forms (papers asking for information), the word "City" is generally used for the place where a person lives, even if the person who wants to write in the form might live in a city, a  town , or a  village  or  Hamlet (place) hamlet  (a very small village). ref  (See below: Size of cities)

 Size of cities  
 Image:004SFEC LONDON-200705.JPG thumb|250px|The River Thames is part of London's transport system. This picture shows the "City of London".  
 image:Skyscrapers of Shinjuku 2009 January.jpg thumb|250px| Tokyo , is the world's most populous metropolitan area. 
The sizes of cities can be very different. This depends on the type of city that it is. Cities that were built hundreds of years ago and which have not changed much, are very much smaller than modern cities. There are two main reasons. One reason is that old cities often have a city wall, and most of the city is inside it. Another important reason is that the streets in old cities are often narrow. If the city got too big, it was hard for a cart carrying food to get to the  market place . People in cities need food, and the food always has to come from outside the city. Cities that were on a river like  London  could grow much bigger than cities that were on a mountain like  Sienna  in  Italy , because the river made a  transport  route for carrying food and other  goods , as well as for transporting people. London has been changing continually for hundreds of years, while Siena, which was a very important city in the 1300s has changed very little in 700 years. Modern cities with modern transport systems can grow very large, because the streets are wide enough for cars, buses and trucks, and there are often railway lines as well.

In the US, the word city is often used for towns that are not very big. When the first European people went to America, they gave the name "city" to new places. They hoped the places would be great cities in the future. For example, Salt Lake City was the name given to a village of 148 people. When they started building the town they made street plans and called it Great Salt Lake City (for the nearby Great Salt Lake). Now, 150 years later, it really is a big city. 

In modern times many cities have grown bigger and bigger. The whole area is often called a  " metropolis "  and can sometimes includes several small ancient towns and villages. The  metropolis  of London includes the City of London, the City of Westminster and many old villages such as Notting Hill, Southwark, Richmond, Greenwich and etc. The part that is officially known as the "City of London" only takes up one square mile. The rest is known as "Greater London". Many other cities have grown in the same way. 

These giant cities can be exciting places to live, and many people can find good jobs there, but modern cities also have many problems. Many people cannot find jobs in the cities and have to get  money  by  beggar begging  or by  crime .  Car s, factories, and  garbage waste  create a lot of  pollution  that makes people sick. the smallest city is Urban history Image:Carcassonne-vignes.jpg thumb|250px|Carcassonne is an ancient city in  France .  

 Urban  History is history of  civilization . The first cities were made in ancient times, as soon as people began to create  civilization . Famous ancient cities which fell to  ruins  included  Babylon ,  Troy ,  Mycenae  and Mohenjo Daro.

 Benares  in northern  India  is one among the ancient cities which has a history of more 3000 years. Other cities that have existed since ancient times are  Athens  in  Greece ,  Rome  and  Volterra  in  Italy ,  Alexandria  in  Egypt  and  York  in England.

In  Europe , in the  Middle Ages , being a city was a special  wikt:privilege privilege , granted by  nobility . Cities that fall into this category, usually had (or still have) city walls. The people who lived in the city were privileged over those who did not. Medieval cities that still have walls include  Carcassonne  in  France ,  Tehran  in  Iran ,  Toledo, Spain Toledo  in  Spain  and  Canterbury  in  England . 

In the  United Kingdom , a city is a town which people have always called a city, or which has got the name "city" status by royal charter (a special paper from the king or queen). Cities usually get this because they have a special number of people or are important. In the past, cities got that name if they had a cathedral or a university. Some cathedral cities, for example St David's, are small, and people do not normally think of them as cities. Cities that became cities because of their university generally grow because more people move there to be educated at the university colleges. The university cities of  Oxford  and  Cambridge  are famous throughout the world. The largest city is Shanghai, while the fastest growing is  Dubai . The smallest city in the UK is  Wells .

 World's largest cities 
 Image:Rocinha Favela.jpg thumb|250px|In  Rio de Janeiro , a city famous for its beauty, large slums lie between the richest districts. Many of the world's large cities have areas of  poverty  like this.  
 File:KL-Skyline Night HDR.JPG thumb|250px| Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia , shows a modern city centre lit up at night. 
These cities have more than 10 million people:

 Shanghai ,  China  - 23 million
 Tokyo ,  Japan  - 20+ million
 Mexico City ,  Mexico  - 18 million
 Mumbai ,  India  - 18 million
 Sao Paulo ,  Brazil  - 18 million
 Lagos ,  Nigeria  - 13 million
 Calcutta , India - 13 million
 Buenos Aires ,  Argentina  - 12 million
 Seoul ,  South Korea  - 12 million
 Beijing , China - 12 million
 Karachi ,  Pakistan  - 12 million
 Dhaka ,  Bangladesh  - 11 million
 Manila ,  Philippines  - 11 million
 Cairo ,  Egypt  - 11 million
 Osaka , Japan - 11 million
 Rio de Janeiro , Brazil - 11 million
 Tianjin , China - 10 million
 Moscow , Russia - 10 million
 Lahore ,  Pakistan  - 10 million

 Gallery of cities  
 gallery  
File:Los Angeles downtown.jpg|[[Los Angeles]], USA
File:Antalya falezler.jpg|[[Antalya]], in Turkey
File:Bangkok skytrain sunset.jpg|[[Bangkok]], Thailand
File:Down Town Sydney.jpg|[[Sydney]] CBD
Image:NYC wideangle south from Top of the Rock.jpg|[[New York City]]
File:Chicago aerial view.jpg|[[Chicago]], USA
File:Warsaw7ob.jpg|[[Warsaw]], in Poland 
 gallery 

 References  
 reflist 

 Category:Cities  