Politics

Politics  is the way that people living in groups make decisions. 
Politics is about making agreements between people so that they can live together in groups such as  tribe s,  city cities , or  country countries . In large groups, such as countries, some people may spend a lot of their time making such agreements. These people are called  politician s. Politicians, and sometimes other people, may get together to form a  government . The study of politics in universities is called  political science , political studies, or  public administration .

In everyday life, the term "politics" refers to the way that countries are governed, and to the ways that governments make rules and laws. But politics can also be seen in other groups, too, such as in big companies, schools and churches.

  Governments  
The government   tries to lead the whole group. Governments do things such as:
  Decide which people get which pieces of  land 
  Decide which people can tell other people what to do
  Decide whether to go to  war  with another country
  Create  money 
  Build things for the use of the whole group, such as  road s,  hospital s,  library libraries , and  dock s.
   education Educate  people, either for their own good, or to teach them what the government wants them to know
  Take care of the very young, the sick, or the very  old 
  Manage the  welfare  of the country and manages the money available for spending on services ( Hospital s,  School s, etc.)

One of the ways the government leads the group is by making  law s and rules which tell everybody what they can and can not do. The government makes these laws so that society will be safe and well-ordered. The law that "you must not drink alcohol while driving a car" stops people from  drunk driving , which could kill people. The law "you must wear a helmet on a motorcycle" makes sure that people protect themselves.

The government can also control people and what happens in a country in other ways besides making laws.
  For example, how the government spends its money makes a big difference in what people will do or what will happen to people. If the government spends a lot of money on hospitals and nurses, the people will probably become healthier.
  Also, if people like their government, or think that their government is wise, they may do something just because their government says it is a good thing to do. Governments often make posters or television advertisements that encourage people to stop smoking cigarettes or eat more fruits and vegetables.

Politics is often compared to  ethics  (ideas about right and wrong). Ethics is a more  abstract  study of right and wrong. Ethics is usually more  concern ed with  principle  than law or politics or diplomacy, so many people think ethics is not  practical . But without some  agreement  on ethics, there is probably no way to even have a  debate ,  law s or an  election . There is always some agreement on ethics and  personal conduct  in a  political system .

  Political parties  
In most countries, people have formed  political parties  to put forward their ideas. There is usually some disagreement between people within a party, but they work together because they feel that they agree on enough things, and they will have more power if they join together. They agree to take the same  position  on many  Issue (debate) issues , and agree to support the same changes to  law  and the same  leader s. An election is usually a competition between different parties.

  History  
The Greek philosopher  Aristotle  wrote that humans are a political animal and that  ethics  and politics are closely linked.
	
 Niccolo Machiavelli  wrote that politics was firstly about having and keeping  Influence power . He said that without power, a leader could do nothing.

In 1651,  Thomas Hobbes  wrote  Leviathan (book) Leviathan , a book about politics. Hobbes wrote that people living in groups often give up some of their rights in exchange for some protections from a government.
	
In the 1800s,  John Stuart Mill  developed the "liberal" idea of politics. Mill said that democracy is the most important political development of the 1800s. He said that there should be more protection for individual rights against the government.  Bernard Crick  wrote a list of the  political virtues , which were about  best practice s of politics itself.

  International politics  
There are also disagreements between different countries. Attempts to solve the problem with meetings are called  diplomacy . This is politics between  nation s instead of politics within nations. If the problems are not resolved by diplomatic meetings they can lead to  war  or  terrorism .

 Related pages 
 commonscat 
 Political economy 
 Constitutional economics 
   Geopolitics 

 Category:Politics  