Cat

about domestic cats the cat family Felidae the musical Cats (musical) 
 Taxobox
  name   Cat
  status   Domesticated
  image   Collage of Six Cats-02.jpg
  image_caption   
  image_width   230px
  regnum    Animal ia
  phylum    Chordate Chordata 
  classis    Mammal ia
  fossil_range    Pleistocene   ndash  Recent
  ordo    Carnivora 
  familia    Felidae 
  genus    Felis 
  binomial    Felis catus 
  binomial_authority   ( Carolus Linnaeus Linnaeus , 1758) 

 Cats , also called  domestic cats  ( Felis catus ), are  carnivore carnivorous  (meat-eating)  mammal s, of the  family (biology) family   Felidae .

Cats have been  domestication domesticated  (tame) for nearly 10,000 years. ref name 9500 years cite web   title   Oldest known pet cat? 9500-year-old burial found on Cyprus   url    http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2004/04/0408_040408_oldestpetcat.html    accessdate   2007-03-06  date 2004-04-08   publisher   National Geographic News ref  They are currently the most popular  pet s in the world. ref name SciAm cite web  url http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=the-taming-of-the-cat   title The evolution of house cats  publisher Scientific American  author Driscoll, Carlos A; Clutton-Brock, Juliet; Kitchener, Andrew C. and O'Brien, Stephen J.  accessdate 26 August 2009 ref  Their origin is probably the  African Wildcat   Felis silvestris lybica .

Cats were probably first kept because they ate  mice , and this is still their main 'job' in farms throughout the world. Later they were kept because they are friendly and good companions.

A young cat is called a  kitten . Cats are sometimes called  kitty  or  pussycat . An  entire  female cat is a  queen , and an  entire  male cat is a  tom . ref Entire  means a female cat that is not spayed, and a male cat that is not neutered, leaving either able to reproduce. ref 

Domestic cats are found in shorthair, longhair, and hairless breeds. Cats which are not specific breeds can be referred to as 'domestic shorthair' (DSH) or 'domestic longhair' (DLH).

The word 'cat' is also used for other  Felidae felines . Felines are usually called either big cats or small cats. The big cats are well known:  lion s,  tiger s,  leopard s,  jaguar s,  puma s, and  cheetah s. There are small cats in most parts of the world, such as the  lynx  in northern  Europe . The big cats and wild cats are not tame, and can be very dangerous.

  History  
 Image:Wiki-Felis sylvestris.png thumb|right|230px|Past range of  Felis silvestris . 

In the past, people kept domestic cats because they hunted and ate mice, rats, and insects. Today, people often keep cats as pets. There are also domestic cats which live without being cared for by people. These kinds of cats are called "feral cats".

The oldest evidence of cats kept as pets is from the  Mediterranean  island of  Cyprus , around 7500 BC. Ancient Egyptians worshipped cats as gods, and often  mummification mummified  them so they could be with their owners "for all of eternity". 

Today, special food for cats is widely available in the developed countries. Proper feeding will help a cat live longer compared to hunting or being fed table scraps. Not correctly feeding a cat can lead to problems (see below for health concerns).

Cats cannot taste sweet foods (with  sugar ) because of a  mutation  (change) in their ancestors which removed the ability to taste sweet things.

  Cat anatomy  
Cats have  anatomy  similar to the other members of the  genus   Felis . The genus has extra lumbar (lower back) and thoracic (chest)  vertebrae . This helps to explain the cat's  Spine spinal  mobility and  flexibility . Unlike human arms, cat forelimbs are attached to the shoulder by free-floating  clavicle  bones. These allow cats to pass their body through any space into which they can fit their heads. ref name Gillis 2002 cite web title Cat skeleton last Gillis first Rick (ed.) work Zoolab: a website for animal biology publisher University of Wisconsin location La Crosse, WI date 22 July 2002 url   http://bioweb.uwlax.edu/zoolab/Table_of_Contents/Lab-9b/Cat_Skeleton_1/cat_skeleton_1.htm archiveurl   http://web.archive.org/web/20061206105542/http://bioweb.uwlax.edu/zoolab/Table_of_Contents/Lab-9b/Cat_Skeleton_1/cat_skeleton_1.htm archivedate 6 December 2006 accessdate 7 September 2012 ref 

The cat  skull  is unusual among mammals in having very large eye sockets and a powerful and specialized jaw. ref name Case Cite book title The cat: its behavior, nutrition, and health last Case first Linda P. year 2003 publisher Iowa State University Pr location Ames, IA isbn 0-8138-0331-4 ref rp 35  Compared to other felines, domestic cats have narrowly spaced  canine teeth : this is an  adaptation  to their preferred prey of small  rodents . ref name Smith1992 Cite book title Structure, function and evolution of teeth last Smith first Patricia last2 Tchernov first2 Eitan year 1992 page 217 publisher Freund Publishing House Ltd. isbn 965-222-270-4 ref  Cats, like dogs, walk directly on their toes, with the bones of their feet making up the lower part of the visible leg. ref name Lacquaniti 1999 Cite journal title Motor patterns in walking last Lacquaniti first F. last2 Grasso first2 R. last3 Zago first3 M. journal News Physiol. Sci. volume 14 issue 4 pages 168-174 date 1999 pmid 11390844 ref 

Cats walk very precisely. Unlike most mammals, when cats walk, they use a "pacing"  gait ; that is, they move the two legs on one side of the body before the legs on the other side. This trait is shared with  camel s and  giraffe s. As a walk speeds up into a  trot , a cat's gait will change to be a " diagonal " gait, similar to that of most other mammals: the diagonally opposite hind and forelegs will move at the same time. ref name Christensen 2004 Cite book title Outwitting cats last Christensen first Wendy page 23 publisher Globe Pequot year 2004 isbn 1-59228-240-7 url   http://books.google.com/?id=WmuQQXU6EtAC&pg=PA23 ref  Most cats have five  claw s on their front paws, and four on their rear paws. ref name Danforth1947 Cite journal title Heredity of polydactyly in the cat last Danforth first C.H. journal Journal of Heredity volume 38 pages 107-112 year 1947 url   http://jhered.oxfordjournals.org/content/38/4/107.full.pdf pmid 20242531 issue 4 ref  On the inside of the front paws there is something which looks like a sixth "finger". This special feature, on the inside of the  wrist s, is the carpal pad, also found on other cats and on dogs.

  Behaviour  
 File:Don't mess with me mum!.jpg thumb|right|200px|The cat on the right is fed up with the cat on the left and this is a semi-serious warning. 
 File:Cat November 2010-1a.jpg thumb|right|200px|The stripes on this standard tabby cat help it hide in long grass and bushes. It's a kind of  camouflage . 

Cats are active  carnivore s, ref http://www.felinefuture.com/ ref  meaning they hunt live  prey . Their main prey is small  mammal s (like  mice ). They will also stalk, and sometimes kill and eat,  bird s. Cats eat a wide variety of prey, including  insect s, and seem especially to like house  fly flies  and bluebottles. Their main method of hunting is  stalk and pounce . While dogs have great stamina and will chase prey over long distances, cats are extremely fast, but only over short distances. The basic cat coat colouring,  tabby  (see top photo), gives it good  camouflage  in  grass  and  woodland . The cat creeps towards a chosen victim, keeping its body flat and near to the ground so that it cannot be seen easily, until it is close enough for a rapid dash or pounce. Cats, especially kittens, practice these  instinct ive behaviours in play with each other or on small toys.

Cats are quiet and well-behaved animals, making them popular pets. Young kittens are playful. They can easily entertain themselves with a variety of store-bought or homemade toys. House cats have also been known to teach themselves to use lever-type doorknobs and toilet handles. ref http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WofFb_eOxxA YouTube - Gizmo Flushes ref 

Cats are fairly  wikt:independent independent  animals. They can look after themselves and do not need as much attention as dogs do.

  Communication  
Cats use many different sounds for  communication , including  meow ing, purring, trilling, hissing, growling, squeaking,  chirp ing,  click ing and grunting. ref name Channel3000Meows cite web   url    http://www.channel3000.com/news/1472741/detail.html    title   Meows mean more to cat lovers   publisher   Channel3000.com   accessdate   2006-06-14 ref 

 Body language Body posture  is also important. The whole shape of the body changes when a cat is relaxed, or when it is alert. Also, the position of their ears and tail are used for communication, as well as their usual functions.

These ways of communication are very important. They are used between a mother cat and her kittens. They are also used between male and female cats; and between cats and other species, such as dogs. A mother cat protecting her kittens will fight off the largest dog. She gives good warning with a frightening display, hissing furiously, showing her claws, arching her back, and making her hair stand on end. If that fails, she attacks the dog's face with her  claw s. It has been said that no dog ever tries such an attack a second time. ref Konrad Lorenz 1950.  Man meets dog . ref 

  Mating  
Cats only mate when the queen is "in heat". Heat periods occur about every two weeks and last 4 to 6 days. ref name compendium  Mating in cats is a spectacular event. Several toms may be attracted to a queen in heat. The males will fight over her, and the victor wins the right to mate. At first, the female will reject the male, but eventually the female will allow the male to mate. The female will utter a loud yowl as the male pulls out of her. This is because a male cat's  penis  has a band of about 120-150 backwards-pointing spines, which are about one  millimeter  long; ref cite journal  author Aronson L.R. & Cooper M.L  title Penile spines of the domestic cat: their endocrine-behavior relations  journal Anat. Rec.  volume 157  issue 1  pages 71-8  year 1967  pmid 6030760  doi 10.1002/ar.1091570111  url http://www.catcollection.org/files/PenileSpines.pdf   first1 LR  first2 ML  issn 0003-276X ref  upon withdrawal of the penis, the spines rake the walls of the female's  vagina , which is a trigger ref Trigger: in the sense of  an event which starts other events . ref  for  ovulation . After mating, the female will wash her  vulva  thoroughly. If a male attempts to breed with her at this point, the female will attack him. After about 20 to 30 minutes. once the female is finished grooming, the cycle will repeat. ref name compendium 

Because ovulation is not always triggered, females may not get  pregnant  by the first tom which mates with them. ref cite journal  author Wildt D.E; Seager S.W. & Chakraborty PK  title Effect of copulatory stimuli on incidence of ovulation and on serum luteinizing hormone in the cat  journal Endocrinology  volume 107  issue 4  pages 1212-7  year 1980  pmid 7190893  doi 10.1210/endo-107-4-1212  first1 DE  first2 SW  first3 PK  issn 0013-7227 ref  A queen may mate with more than one tom when she is in heat, and different kittens in a litter may have different fathers. ref name compendium cite web  url http://vlsstore.com/Media/PublicationsArticle/PV_23_12_1049.pdf   title Prolific cats: the estrous cycle  publisher Veterinary Learning Systems  accessdate 19 June 2009 ref  The cycle ceases when the queen is pregnant.

The  gestation  period for cats is about two months, with an average length of 66 days. ref cite journal  author Tsutsui T. & Stabenfeldt G.H  title Biology of ovarian cycles, pregnancy and pseudopregnancy in the domestic cat  journal J. Reprod. Fertil. Suppl.  volume 47  issue   pages 29-35  year 1993 pmid 8229938  issn 0449-3087 ref  The size of a  litter  is usually three to five kittens. Kittens are  weaning weaned  at between six and seven weeks, and cats normally reach sexual maturity at 5-10 months (females) and to 5-7 months (males). ref name compendium  Females can have two to three litters per year, so might produce up to 150 kittens in their breeding life of about ten years. ref name compendium 

  Birth and after  
Pregnant queens deliver their litters by themselves, guided by  instinct . The queen finds the safest place she can. Then she will clean it thoroughly, with her tongue, if necessary. Here she will quietly give birth. She licks the newborn kits clean. In the wild, leaving a scent is risking a dangerous encounter with other animals. The kits are born  blind  and with closed eyes. They  suckle  on her teats, and sleep a good deal. After two weeks or so, their eyes open. At that stage they have blue eyes, but not the best sight. A bit later, the best developed kit will totter out of the nest. The others follow. They will soon recognise you as a living thing: that is a great moment. At first, they go back to the nest to feed and sleep. After some more days they leave the nest for good, but still they may sleep together in a 'kitten heap'.

The queen, meanwhile, has left the nest from time to time, to hunt, feed, and also to  urinate  and  defecate . Unlike the tom, she covers up her business to hide her scent. Very soon, the kits will urinate anywhere they please unless one trains them. This is done after they are weaned, when they are ready for some kitten food. Here is how to do it:
 1. Prepare clean cat tray filled with absorbent grit. 
 2. Give kittens their special kitten food. 
 3. Take the lead kitten right after it has eaten, place it in your cat tray.
 4. Gently stroke its tummy with one finger. 
 5. Watch as kitten sits down promptly and urinates. Do same for other kits.
 6. Repeat next time if they need it. They will not need a third time.

What you have done is exactly what the queen would do in the wild. You have  Releaser triggered  a  reflex  which all kittens have. The thing is, the tray is artificial, and your queen may do her business outside. But at least when young, kittens need a tray. Your next job is to call the vet, who will tell you when to bring the kits for their vaccination. ref How to look after your cat : there are two books with this title, as follows. 1. by Colin and Jacqui Hawkins, Walker Books, 1996. 2. by Alan Edwards, Southwater, 2006. ref 
 File:2006-07-09 katze2.jpg thumb|220px|Kitten with string 

Kittens play endlessly. It is how they do their learning. They will play their favourite games, such as 'hide and pounce', with almost anyone or anything. Soft balls on strings are a standard toy; so is a scratching post.

With cats there is a limit to how far you can train them. They are at least as intelligent as dogs, but they are not pack animals. They like to do their own thing, and owners do best by fitting in.  Never hit a cat : if you do, the relationship will never be the same again. If you really want to dissuade them, try hissing. Also, a noise they do not like will make them leave. It has been said that no one really owns a cat; many cats collect extra owners, and may change house if they do not like the treatment... ref Gallico, Paul.  The silent miaow: a cat's eye view of Homo sapiens . Heinemann, London. ref 

If your kitten was born in your home do not let it out of the house until it is two to three months old. If you have the mother, she will look after the kit. But if you have got the kit from a vet or dealer, keep it in for several weeks. When it does go out, you need to watch over it. The main problem is that it may easily get lost. In time, the kit will learn every inch of the house and garden. Then, you can happily let it roam. ref cite book  title The Complete Book of Cat Care: how to raise a happy and healthy cat  last Behrend  first Katrin  coauthors Wegler, Monika; translated from German by Elizabeth D. Crawford.  year 1991  publisher Barron's Educational Series, Inc.  location Hauppauge, NY   isbn 0-8120-4613-7  ref 

  Grooming  
Cats are very clean animals. They groom themselves by licking their  fur . The cat's tongue can act as a hairbrush and can clean and untangle a cat's fur. Still, owners may buy grooming products to help the cat take care of itself. After licking their fur, cats sometimes get hairballs. ref http://cats.about.com/cs/catmanagement101/a/hairballs.htm  But note: this ref overstates the problem. ref  A hairball is a small amount of fur that is  vomit ed up by animals when it becomes too big. This is quite normal. Owners brush their cats to try to prevent a lot of hairballs.

  Food  
 File:Brown Burmese Cat Headshot.jpg thumb|left|180px|A typical brown Burmese cat 
Many house cats eat food which their owners give them. This food is  manufacture d, and designed to contain the right  nutrient s for cats. There are many different types of cat food. These come in many different flavors and costs are often very small.
 
There is moist canned food and also dry cat food which comes in different sized cans or bags and formulas. There are kitten formulas, cat formulas, health formulas, formulas for reducing a cat's weight, and many others. These can even be organic (made from all natural ingredients), and have vegetables, salmon, tuna, meat, and milk essence. Yet, it's best if the food is at least 95% meat, as that's a cat's diet. Also, make sure the cat is not fed a daily diet of dog food. It could make the cat blind, as it has no  taurine , which is a nutrient for the eyes.

  Health concerns  
 File:Youngkitten.JPG thumb|A very young kitten. This kitten has been taken out of the nest for a photo; its eyes are just open, but it cannot yet see properly. 
 File:Corfu beach 27.JPG thumb|Kittens growing up 
Cats do get diseases, and prevention is better than cure. It is most important to get a young cat  vaccine vaccinated  against some of the most deadly diseases. If a cat gets a disease, a  veterinarian  (animal doctor) can offer help. Some cats, depending on breed, gender, age, and general health, may be more susceptible to disease than others.  Regular visits to a vet can keep a cat alive many extra years by catching sickness and disease early. ref [Anon.] 1983.  Sherley's cat book: the complete book of cat care written by a vetinary surgeon . Ashe Laboratories, Leatherhead, Surrey. ref 

Cats that roam outside will get  flea s at some time. Cat fleas will not live on people, but fleas will not hesitate to bite anyone nearby. Owners may choose to buy anti-flea collars, but any areas where the cat normally sleeps need to be cleaned up. A vet or local pet-shop may offer advice about fleas. It is recommended that people quickly take action when a cat gets fleas because fleas can make cats uncomfortable.

House cats can become  overweight  through lack of exercise and over-feeding. When they get  spayed  or neutered ("fixed"), they tend to exercise less. Spaying is done for queens, and neutering is done for toms. It is important to fix cats, and here are some reasons. First of all, if a female cat has kittens, they will need homes. Finding homes for kittens is often quite difficult. If a tom is not fixed, it develops a disgusting smell. Breeders who have entire toms keep them in a special hut outside the house, for that reason. Fixing also helps to avoid over-population. Over-population means that there are too many cats, and some will be put to sleep (put down) in animal pounds (animal shelters).

Kittens are sometimes born with defects. People who receive cats as gifts are recommended to get it examined for its health. Some birth defects, like heart problems, require urgent vet attention. Others are harmless, like  polydactyly . Polydactyly means many digits, or many "fingers" from poly (many) and dactyl (digit). Sometimes, there is a mutation (change) in cat families. Most cats have only four to five toes per paw, depending on whether it is the front or back paw. These mutated cats have six, seven, and in rare cases even more. All of these cats are called  polydactyl cats . They can also be called  Hemingway cats  because author  Ernest Hemingway  owned many of these cats.

  Other matters  
  Where to find more information  
There are quite a number of reference books on cats. Look for titles like  Encyclopedia of the cat , or  Cat encyclopedia .

  Other cat pages  
   African wildcat 
   Calico cat 
   Cat righting reflex 
   List of cat breeds 
   Ship's cat 

  Other meanings of the word 'cat'  
  As a  verb , "to cat" means to pull a  ship 's  anchor  to rest at its  cathead .  It can also mean to look for a  mate .
  Cat can be a short  nickname  for Katherine, Kathleen, Caitlin, Catalina, Katrina and Catarina.

  References  
 reflist 

  Other websites  
   http://www.catcarelondon.com/all_about_cats.html Cat Care in London and information about cats 

 Category:Cats  