Profanity

Image:Profanity.svg alt=Cartoon drawing|thumb|right|A drawing of profanity replaced by symbols 

 Profanity  is the act of using  swear words .  The  adjective  is 'profane'. Profanities can also be called curse ("cuss") words, dirty words, bad words, foul language, obscenity, obscene language, or expletives. It can be called an oath, although this word also has a normal meaning of a "solemn promise".  

Religious profanity is called  blasphemy .  The  verb  is to blaspheme and the  adjective  is 'blasphemous'. Saying "God!" or "Jesus Christ!" as an expression of surprise or annoyance is considered by many people to be blasphemy, mostly because one of the  Ten Commandments  says not to use God's name "in vain" (without substance or without relevance). Swearing oaths can also be considered wrong by some who follow Jesus' teaching against swearing oaths in the  Gospel s (such as Matthew 5:34).

A profanity usually refers to  religion ,  sex , or bodily functions. These are things that people feel very strongly about. In some languages, such as  French language French , there is more profanity about religion than most other topics.

A profanity can be a word or  gesture  or some other form of behaviour. ref " http://www.m-w.com/dictionary/profane Definition of Profane ", emphasis on original, Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, retrieved on June 5, 2007. ref 
 
Different words can be profanity to different people, and what words are thought of as profanity in English can change over time.

Whether a word is a profanity will always depend on the way people think. Some people will be offended by something, while others will not be. Words which should not be used are  taboo  words. Using such words is thought by some people to be a  sin . For example, some  Christianity Christians , (including  Mormons ) and some  Islam Muslims  believe that swearing is a sin.

  Opinions on profanity  
Some people call profanity "crude," but some say that it is no cruder to say "damn" or "crap" than it is to use "hate" (a word that simply creates a very strong  Emotions emotion , but not a swear word). People who use profanity do not always mean to make anybody feel bad, and tolerance for different forms of profanity can vary widely, from person to person. Most often, using profanity is a verbal outlet for strong feelings (usually unpleasant ones), that might otherwise cause a physical reaction. At other times, some people may use profanity as  humor .

  Coprolalia  
Some people develop a mental condition where they use profanity constantly. This is called  coprolalia . Many people think this is called Tourette syndrome. Tourette syndrome is actually a group of  symptom symptoms  that only includes coprolalia 15% of the time. The condition can be  broken wikt link aggravate aggravated  (made worse) by stress.

  Examples of profanity  
Several of these words come from  Anglo-Saxon  or  Norse  names for body parts, and bodily functions.  They came to be thought of as profanity mostly after the  Normandy Norman s brought  French language French  and  Latin  words for them to England.  

 Cocksucker
 Sex as someone who sucks the penis, this word is considered to be very disgusting and used to describe a disgusting person.

 Cunt
 A  vagina . Also an offensive term for a disliked woman ("She's a real cunt") or "cuntface" or stupid "cunt".

 Dick
 A vulgar term for a  penis  similar to the term 'prick.'

 Fuck
 A  verb , meaning to have  sex . Can also mean to cheat or steal from ("fuck over") someone, to interfere with ("fuck with") something or someone, or to cause harm ("fuck up"). "Fuck up" can also mean to make a mistake. It is often used as a meaningless intensifier, especially in the adverb form ("too fucking expensive"), ("What the fuck?"). Fuck is also used to describe someone under the influence of drugs and or alcohol ("they're fucked up"). A person may also be referred to as a fuck.  The many uses for fuck make it one of the most versatile words in the English language. For example, "That fuck Jonathan was so fucked up last night he fucked some fucking whore and got fucking  gonorrhea . Holy fuck!"
 Honky 

An offensive word for  white people , commonly used in the  United States , first used refer to whites around 1946
 Motherfucker
 An insult that can be used for  :en:Incest sex inside the family , but mostly used in the sense of  bastard . The verb  motherfucking  is used mainly in  rap music  as a stronger form of  fucking . (see above)

 Nigger
 An offensive word for  African American black people . "Nigger" (or "nigga") is commonly used in popular urban black  rap music rap  media, where it is used towards others in friendly or  derogatory  manner.

 Poon
 An offensive term for woman that is very similar to cunt or pussy and also refers to the  vagina .

 Prick
 This term refers to the  penis , and also as an insult for an unpleasant person.

 Pussy
 This term refers to the  vulva , and also to a weak man. It can also refer to the practice of stimulating a woman's vulva,  cunnilingus .

 Quim
 The  vagina  or  vulva . Used similarly to "cunt".

 Shit
 Feces ; also a verb, meaning to  broken wikt link defecate defecate . As an exclamation, it is similar to "fuck". It can be used to refer to any object, although it is often used in reference to drugs ( heroin  or  marijuana  in particular), music, or a person's belongings. May also mean trouble, or annoyance by others ("I'm tired of this shit"). It can also mean very poor/of bad quality ("this music is shit").

  Profane gestures  
These are mostly performed while facing another person, and can be meant toward them, or about them. These gestures are considered as strong as profane words in most cases.

 Biting one's thumb
 Performed by placing the tip of a thumb under the front teeth, then pulling the thumb slightly forward, with the fingers closed. Mocks the "thumbs up" gesture. Can be taken to mean "bite me", though it predates the common use of this phrase.

 Grabbing one's own crotch
 Also an invitation to "bite me", or to perform  :wikt:oral sex oral sex nowiki  in a  broken wikt link servile servile  way.

 Pretending to give  fellatio 
 One pokes out a cheek with the tongue, while rocking a closed hand toward the mouth, at the same time. Indicates something or someone is a waste of time.

 Pretending to masturbate
 Indicates something or someone is a waste of time, or performs poorly.

 Showing one's  middle finger  ("flipping the bird")
 Understood generally to mean "fuck you".

 Thumbing (or "fluting") one's nose
 Performed by placing the tip of a thumb against the tip of the nose, then wiggling the fingers. Expresses  broken wikt link contempt contempt , or thinking that someone is foolish.

 "Up yours"
 One turns a forearm horizontally, while swinging the other fist and forearm around it. Suggests something being shoved into a person's  broken wikt link rectum rectum . If the middle finger is shown, it is a stronger form of "fuck you", or a suggestion of  :wikt:anal sex anal sex .

 References 
 Reflist 

 Category:Profanity * 
 Category:Human communication