Creativity

Creativity  is the  ability  of a person or group to make something new and useful or valuable, or the  process  of making something new and useful or valuable. It happens in all areas of life - science, art, literature and music. As a personal ability it is very difficult to  measure . The reason is that we don't understand the mental processes that help some people be more creative than others. Judging what is creative is also controversial. Some people say only things which are historically new are creative, while other people say that if it is new for the creator and the people around them, then it is also creativity.

Some think creativity is an important thing that makes  human s different from  ape s. Others recognize that even apes, other  primate s, other  mammal s and some birds  adapt  to  survive  by being creative (for example - primates using tools).  Liane Gabora  believes that all  culture  comes from creativity, not  imitation . Therefore, these people say,  human science  should focus on it (pay special attention to it):  Ethics  for example would focus on finding creative  solution s to  ethical dilemma s.  Politics  would focus on the  political virtues  that need some creativity. Imitation would not be the focus of  education .  Linguistics  might be more interested in how new words are created by culture, rather than in how existing ones are used in  grammar .

 Intellectual interests  (recognized as  intellectual rights  or  intellectual property  in the  law ) are a way to  reward  creativity in law, but they do not always work very well. A good example is  copyright  which is supposed to pay  author s and  artist s, but may only pay  lawyer s to make (imitative) arguments in  court .

Creativity is a central question in  economics , where it is known as  ingenuity  (the ability to come up with new ideas) or  individual capital  -  capacity capacities  that  individual s have, that do not arise from simple imitation of what is known already. This is separate from the  instructional capital  that might try to  capture  some of that in a  patent  or  training  system that helps others do what the individual leader or  wikt:founder founder  of the system can do. In  urban economics  there are various ways to measure creativity - the  Bohemian Index  and  Gay Index  are two attempts to do this  wikt:accurate accurately  and  predict  the  economic growth  of  city cities  based on creativity. For information on creativity see  http://www.best100ideas.com practical creative ideas and tools 

 Category:Human behavior 
 Category:Creativity  