European Union

Infobox European Union 
The  European Union  ( abbreviation :  EU ) is a  confederation  of 28 member  country countries  in  Europe , started in 1957 as the  European Economic Community  (EEC). It has created a common economic area with Europe-wide laws allowing the  Citizenship citizens  of EU countries to move and trade in other EU countries almost the same as they do in their own. Nineteen of these countries also share the same type of  money : the  euro . 

The  Treaty of Lisbon  is the most recent  treaty  that says how the Union is run. Every member  state  signed to say that they each agreed with what it says. Most importantly, it says which jobs ('powers') the Union should do for the members and which jobs they should do themselves. The members decide how the Union should act by voting for or against proposals.

The objective of the EU is to bring its member states closer together with respect of  human rights  and  democracy . It does this with a common style of  passport , common rules about fair trading with each other, common agreements about  law enforcement , and other agreements. Most members share a common currency (the euro) and most allow people to travel from one country to another without having to show a passport.

  History  
 File:Quai d'Orsay.jpg thumbnail|Quai d'Orsay (Paris). Robert Schuman gave the speech starting the plan for a European Coal and Steel Community in 1950 
After  World War II , the  country countries  in Europe wanted to live peacefully together and help one another's  economy economies . Instead of fighting for coal and steel, the first member countries  Germany (West) Germany ,  France ,  Italy ,  Belgium ,  Netherlands , and  Luxembourg  created one  European Coal and Steel Community  in  1952 .

In  1957  in the Italian city of  Rome , the member countries signed another treaty and made the  European Economic Community . Now it was a community for coal, steel and for  trade . Later it changed the name to  the  European Community .

In  1993 , with the  Treaty of Maastricht  it changed its name to the European Union. Now the member countries work together not only in politics and economy (coal, steel and trade), but also in money, justice ( law s), and foreign affairs. With the  Schengen Agreement , 22 member countries of the EU opened their borders to each other, so people can now travel from one country to the other without a  passport  or  identity card . Now already 16 member countries have replaced their national currencies with the  euro . 10 new countries became members of the EU in  2004 , 2 more became members in 2007, and 1 more in 2013. Today there are 28 member countries altogether.

  Free movement  
A person who is a  citizen  of a European Union country can live and work in any of the other 27 member countries without needing a work permit or  visa . For example, a  British  person can move to  Greece  to work there, or just to live there, and he or she does not need permission from an  authority  in Greece.

In the same way, products made in one member country can be sold in any other member country without any special permissions or extra taxes. For this reason, the members agree rules on product safety - they want to know that a product made in another country will be as safe as it would be if it had been made in their own.

  Main institutions  
 div style padding-top:15px; padding-bottom:15px center Institutions of the European Union   ref :wikisource:Consolidated version of the Treaty on European Union/Title III: Provisions on the Institutions Consolidated version of the Treaty on European Union/Title III: Provisions on the Institutions ref ref name Europa Institutions Commission cite web last first authorlink coauthors title Institutions: The European Commission work date url http://europa.eu/institutions/inst/comm/index_en.htm format doi accessdate 2007-06-25 ref ref name Parliament's powers cite web title   Parliament's powers and procedures publisher European Parliament url http://www.europarl.europa.eu/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?language=EN&id=46 accessdate   2007-06-12 ref center div 
 div style overflow-x:auto; 
 cellspacing 0 cellpadding 2 style background:#E0E0E0; width:100% style text-align:center width 25% style padding-left:15px; padding-top:10px   File:Europarl logo.svg left|x40px European Parliament br 
-  Legislative  ( lower house ) - 
 rowspan 9 style background:white 
 width 25% style padding-left:15px; padding-top:10px   File:European Council logo.svg left|x40px European Council br 
- Sets impetus and direction -
 rowspan 9 style background:white 
 width 25% style padding-left:15px; padding-top:10px   File:EU Consilium Logo.svg left|x45px Council of the European Union br 
-  Legislative  ( upper house ) -
 rowspan 9 style background:white 
 width 25% style padding-left:15px; padding-top:10px   File:European Commission Logo.gif left|x45px European Commission br 
-  Executive (government) Executive  -
 style text-align: center   div style position:relative; height:95px; overflow:hidden 
 div style position:relative; top:-25px; left:0px; div style overflow-x:hidden; overflow:hidden; width:100% 
 Image:Hemicycle of Louise Weiss building of the European Parliament, Strasbourg.jpg 180px|European Parliament div div div 
   div style position:relative; height:95px; overflow:hidden 
 div style position:relative; top:0px; left:0px; div style overflow-x:hidden; overflow:hidden; width:100% 
 Image:Familiefoto europese raad 2011.jpg 180px|Members of the European Council 2011 div div div 
   div style position:relative; height:95px; overflow:hidden 
 div style position:relative; top:-70px; left:0px; div style overflow-x:hidden; overflow:hidden; width:100% 
 Image:EU Council Room.jpg 180px|EU Council room div div div 
   div style position:relative; height:95px; overflow:hidden 
 div style position:relative; top:-8px; left:0px; div style overflow-x:hidden; overflow:hidden; width:100% 
 Image:Banderas europeas en la Comision Europea.jpg 180px|European Commission building div div div 
 valign top style padding-left:15px; padding-bottom:10px 
  acts together with the Council as a  legislator 
  is  Election elected  by the people
  sits for five years between elections
  shares with the Council the budgetary power and decides in the last instance on the  European Union budget general budget of the EU 
  exerts the democratic control over EU institutions including the  European Commission  and appoints the Commission members
  based and plenary sessions in  Strasbourg , General Secretariat in  Luxembourg (city) Luxembourg , primarily meets in  Brussels 
 valign top style padding-left:15px; padding-bottom:10px 
  summit of the  Head of Government Heads of Government , chaired by the  President of the European Council )
  gives the necessary impetus for the development and sets out general objectives and priorities
  will not legislate
  based in  Brussels 
 valign top style padding-left:15px; padding-bottom:10px 
  consists of government ministers from member states
  acts together with the Parliament as a  legislator 
  exerts together with the Parliament the budgetary power
  ensures coordination of the broad economic and social policy and sets out guidelines for the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP)
  conclude international agreements
  based in  Brussels 
 valign top style padding-left:15px; padding-bottom:10px 
  is the "government"
  has one member from each member state
  submits proposals for new legislation to the Parliament and to the Council
  implements EU policy and administers the  European Union budget budget 
  ensures compliance with EU law
  negotiates international treaties
  based in  Brussels 
 colspan 9 style background:white 
 
 cellspacing 0 cellpadding 2 style background:#E0E0E0; width:100% style text-align:center rowspan 7 width 11% style background:white   File:No image wide.svg 100px|link= 
 width 26% style padding-left:15px; padding-top:10px   Court of Justice of the European Union br 
-  Judiciary  -
 rowspan 7 style background:white 
 width 26% style padding-left:15px; padding-top:10px   File:CURIA RATIONUM logo.svg left|x45px European Court of Auditors br 
- Financial  auditor  -
 rowspan 7 style background:white 
 width 26% style padding-left:15px; padding-top:10px   File:Logo European Central Bank.svg left|x45px European Central Bank br 
- Monetary executive ( central bank ) -
 rowspan 7 width 11% style background:white   File:No image wide.svg 100px|link= 
 style text-align: center   div style position:relative; height:95px; overflow:hidden 
 div style position:relative; top:-30px; left:0px; div style overflow-x:hidden; overflow:hidden; width:100% 
 Image:Sitzungssaal EuGH.jpg 180px|ECJ room div div div 
   div style position:relative; height:95px; overflow:hidden 
 div style position:relative; top:0px; left:0px; div style overflow-x:hidden; overflow:hidden; width:100% 
 Image:Europaischer Rechnungshof.jpg 180px|ECA building div div div 
   div style position:relative; height:95px; overflow:hidden 
 div style position:relative; top:-180px; left:0px; div style overflow-x:hidden; overflow:hidden; width:100% 
 Image:European Central Bank 041107.jpg 180px|European Central Bank div div div 
 valign top style padding-left:15px; padding-bottom:10px 
  ensure uniformity of interpretation of European law
  has the power to decide legal disputes between  European Union member state EU member states , EU institutions, businesses and individuals
  based in  Luxembourg (city) Luxembourg 
 valign top style padding-left:15px; padding-bottom:10px 
  shall examine the proper use of revenue and expenditure of the EU institutions
  based in  Luxembourg (city) Luxembourg 
 valign top style padding-left:15px; padding-bottom:10px 
  forms together with the national central banks the European System of Central Banks and thereby determining the monetary policy of the EU
  ensures price stability of the  Euro  by controlling the money supply of participating countries
  based in  Frankfurt am Main 
 
 div 

  Council of the European Union  
 mainarticle Council of the European Union 
 File:Political System of the European Union.svg thumb|400px|Political system of the European Union 

The Council of the European Union is the main decision-making group. The cabinet ministers of the member countries meet (Ministers for Foreign affairs, for Agriculture, for Justice, etc...) and discuss issues that are important to them. 

Before the Treaty of Lisbon (written in 2007, implemented in 2008) each member state takes a turn at being President of the Council for six months. For example, from January 2007 until July 2007,  Germany  held the presidency. The six months before that,  Finland  held the presidency. Now the President of the European Union chairs the council summits. The President of the Council is the organiser and manager and is voted into office for a duration of two and a half years. He or she does not have the power to make decisions about the European Union like the President of the United States does for that country.

Member countries with a large population (Germany, France, United Kingdom, etc.) have more votes than countries with small populations ( Luxembourg ,  Malta , etc.) but a decision cannot be made if enough countries vote against the decision.

Twice a year, the heads of government ( Prime Minister s) and/or the heads of state ( President s) meet to talk about the main issues and make decisions on different issues. This meeting is different and not as formal. It is known as a  European Council .

 Note: This is not the same thing as the  Council of Europe , which is not part of the European Union .

  European Commission  
 mainarticle European Commission 

The European Commission runs the day to day running of the EU and writes laws, like a  government . Laws written by the Commission are discussed and changed by the  European Parliament  and the  Council of the European Union . 

The Commission has one  President  and 27 Commissioners, selected by the European Council. The Commission President is appointed by the European Council with the approval of the  European Parliament . ref name Europa Institutions cite web title Institutions of the EU: The European Commission url http://europa.eu/institutions/inst/comm/index_en.htm accessdate 2007-06-18 ref 

The Commission operates like a  cabinet  government. There is one Commissioner per  European Union member state member state , though Commissioners are bound to represent the interests of the EU as a whole rather than their home state.

  European Parliament  
 File:EP Strasbourg hemicycle l-gal.jpg thumbnail|The Parliament is the only directly elected body 
 mainarticle European Parliament 
 seealso European Union budget 

The  Parliament  has a total of 785 members (called Members of the European Parliament, or MEP). They are elected in their countries every five years by the citizens of the European Union member countries. The Parliament can approve, reject or change proposed laws. It can also sack the European Commission. In that case, the entire commission would have to give up their jobs.

  Politics  
There are many discussions in the EU about how it should develop and change in the future.

The main reasons why European countries came together are political and economic:
  The need to prevent another European war after  World War I  and  World War II .
  The need to respect  human rights ,  rule of law  and  democracy  more affirmed by  Council of Europe .
  The need to have a common economic area.

  Member countries  
 mainarticle European Union member state 
In 1951, six countries made the  European Coal and Steel Community , a basic version of what the EU is now. These six then went further and in 1957 they made the European Economic Community and the European Coal and Steel Community. The UK and others decided not to join, and then when the UK changed its mind it was stopped from joining by  President of the French Republic French President   Charles de Gaulle . When he was no longer President, the UK and others started to join. Today there are 28 members but the idea that more should join is not seen as a good one by everyone.

 File:EU map brown.svg thumb|right|350px|The member states of the European Union highlighted in light brown. 
 valign top 
 Founders in 1957
   flag Belgium 
   flag France 
   flag Germany name West Germany  (later just Germany) ref group Note German Democratic Republic East Germany  and  West Germany  became one country in 1990. Since then the whole of Germany is an EU member country. ref 
   flag Italy 
   flag Luxembourg 
   flag Netherlands 

 Joined in 1973
   flag Denmark 
   flag Ireland 
   flag United Kingdom 

 Joined in 1981
   flag Greece 

 Left in 1985
   flag Greenland ref group Note Greenland  joined as part of Denmark, but was given some power to rule itself afterwards. With this power, it decided to leave the EEC. ref 

 Joined in 1986
   flag Portugal 
   flag Spain 

 valign top 

 Joined in 1995
   flag Austria 
   flag Finland 
   flag Sweden 

 Joined in 2004
   flag Cyprus ref group Note Although  Northern Cyprus  is officially part of Cyprus (and the EU), it is not actually controlled by the Government of Cyprus and its passports are not accepted by EU members. ref 
   flag Czech Republic 
   flag Estonia 
   flag Hungary 
   flag Latvia 
   flag Lithuania 
   flag Malta 
   flag Poland 
   flag Slovakia 
   flag Slovenia 

 Joined in 2007
   flag Bulgaria 
   flag Romania 

 Joined in 2013
   flag Croatia ref cite web url http://www.croatiantimes.com/news/General_News/2011-05-23/19468/Croatia_to_become_EU_member_1_July_2013 title Croatia to become EU member 1 July 2013 work Croatian Times date May 23, 2011 accessdate November 17, 2011 ref 
 

 references group Note 

 Serbia ,  Montenegro , the  Republic of Macedonia ,  Turkey  and  Iceland  are "candidate countries"; they are being considered for membership.  Albania ,  Bosnia and Herzegovina  and  Kosovo  are expected to follow.

However, since there have been many political problems happening in Turkey recently, especially with  Erdogan President Erdogan 's arresting of tens of thousands of political rivals since the failed  Coup d'etat coup  attempt on July 15, 2016, it is unlikely that it would be allowed to part of the EU anytime soon because EU members believe that the current Turkish government is not respecting human rights, rule of law, or democracy. ref Cite web url http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-37923758 title Turkey 'backsliding' in bid to join EU, says Commission first last date website publisher accessdate ref 

 Motto 
 United in diversity  (or  together with many types of people  in Simple English), is the motto of the European Union.

The motto in other languages: ref cite web  url http://europa.eu/about-eu/basic-information/symbols/motto/index_en.htm   title The EU motto  accessdate 2016-05-30  work Europa  publisher European Union ref 
 valign top 
   lang-bg Obedinen v mnogoobrazieto 
   lang-hr Ujedinjeni u razlicitosti 
   lang-cs Jednotna v rozmanitosti 
   lang-da Forenet i mangfoldighed 
   lang-nl In verscheidenheid verenigd 
   lang-et Uhinenud mitmekesisuses 
   lang-fi Moninaisuudessaan yhtenainen 
   lang-fr Unie dans la diversite 
 valign top 
   lang-de In Vielfalt geeint 
   lang-el Enomenoi sten polumorphia 
   lang-hu Egyseg a sokfelesegben 
   lang-ga Ni ceart go cur le cheile 
   lang-it Unita nella diversita 
   lang-lv Vienota dazadiba 
   lang-lt Suvienijusi ivairove 
   lang-mt Maghquda fid-diversita 
 valign top 
   lang-pl Zjednoczona w roznorodnosci 
   lang-pt Unida na diversidade 
   lang-ro Uniti in diversitate 
   lang-sk Zjednoteni v rozmanitosti 
   lang-sl Zdruzena v raznolikosti 
   lang-es Unida en la diversidad 
   lang-sv Forenade i mangfalden 
 

  Brexit  
On June 23, 2016, the UK held a historical vote on whether the UK should stay in the EU or leave it, commonly known as  United Kingdom European Union membership referendum Brexit . 52% of all the UK citizens who voted had voted to leave the EU, while 48% voted to stay. ref Cite web url http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-politics-32810887 title Brexit: All you need to know about the UK leaving the EU first last date website publisher accessdate ref  The UK is the first country to try to leave the EU. Even though the UK voted to leave the EU, it is not expected to be completely out of the EU until 2018.

 Related pages 
   Citizenship of the European Union 
   Multilingualism 
   United Kingdom European Union membership referendum Brexit 

  References  
 reflist 2 

  Other websites  
 commons European Union 
   http://europa.eu/ European Union online portal 
   http://www.eu2013.lt/en/ Lithuania's EU Council Presidency 
   http://ec.europa.eu/youreurope/ 'Your Europe' information website 
   http://www.ina.fr/europe-des-cultures/En/Html/PrincipaleAccueil.php Europe of cultures  50 years of artistic creation and cultural life from the 27 countries of the European Union

 G8 
 Nobel Peace Prize 

 Category:European Union   
 Category:1952 establishments