Society

Society  is the term to describe human beings together (collective, the sum of their  social network s and  power network s). It does not refer to everything everybody thinks or does, but only to those things that everybody acts upon - or refuses to do - quite reliably.

Because it must keep even the poorest and weakest members of a society willing to help even the richest and strongest, a society is very concerned with its  citizenship ,  rights ,  ethics  and  time limit s. These are basic ways to achieve  fairness . If they break down badly, people will think the society is unfair and start taking things from each other, refusing to help each other, or seeing those who have more as cheats.

While every society is different, the way it breaks down and fails is very often the same:  fraud ,  theft ,  violence ,  war  and sometimes even  genocide  if people stop identifying with the society and thus identify with what they think of as a "race" of people. A new society may be formed out of only those who still agree, or who just survive the collapse of an old failed one.

If the strength and unity of any society's members' willingness to help each other is to be measured, it is called  social capital , because it substitutes for other forms of  Capital (economics) capital . One needs less  money  with more  solidarity  in society, because the collective substitutes for the currency.

However, usually, the strength is not directly measured, but only assumed. People take  risk s that society will support them, without knowing for sure that it will. For instance, they may refuse to obey the  law , and count on their fellow society members to free them in a  jury  or  court of appeal .

A  social contract  sets out rules for this kind of cooperation. One kind of social contract is a  constitution  - which allows for a jury or court to decide that the law, not the person, is wrong, according to the society's rules.

  Related pages  
   Sociology 


 stub 

 Category:Society  