Gardening

File:Phlox paniculata20090811 140.jpg thumb|240px|Garden phlox ( Phlox paniculata ) 
 Gardening  is the growing of  plant s such as  flower s,  shrub s and  trees  as a  hobby  or  recreation . Some people also grow  vegetable s or  fruit  in their gardens. People do gardening outdoors in the  soil  in their backyard, or in pots or containers on their  balcony  or on their  patio . Some people do gardening on a  roof .

People do indoor gardening inside their house or inside a building. Sometimes indoor gardening is done in  greenhouse s, which are special  building s where plants are grown. A greenhouse has a transparent  glass  or plastic roof and walls that let  sun light in.  Water  gardening is growing plants in ornamental pools and ponds. People doing water gardening plant  water lily water lilies  and other aquatic plants. 

Gardening can be done outside of the home, in city  park s,  botanical garden s,  zoo s,  amusement park s,  theme park s, and around tourist attractions. These types of gardens are cared for by people called  gardener s or  groundskeeper s.

  Gardening compared with farming  
Gardening is related to  farm ing. But farming is done on a much larger scale. A farm may have hundreds of square kilometers of plants and  crop s. A garden in a person's backyard usually only measures a few square meters. As well, farming is done as a business, to sell the crops, fruit, and vegetables that are produced. Gardening is done just to produce  fruit  or  vegetable s for the gardener's own family. Gardening is done as a  hobby  or as a  recreation , not as a business.

  Gardening tools  
Gardeners use  tool s to dig in the soil and water the crops. These tools include a  spade , a fork, a  hoe , a  basket , a  watering can , a  hose , a  bucket , a  trowel   and a  wheelbarrow .

  Gardens as art  
In many countries and cultures, designing beautiful gardens is considered to be an  art . In  Japan , for instance,  Zen   monk s created  Japanese garden s. In  Europe  in the 1700s, kings and queens had formal gardens built (for example the gardens at  Versailles ,  France ).

 Related pages 
 Agriculture 
 Horticulture 

 biology-stub 

 Category:Gardening  