Ethics

Ethics  is the part of  philosophy  that deals with  Goodness good  and  evil . Ethics tries to answer questions like:

  What actions are good? What actions are evil?
  How can we tell the difference?
  Are good and evil the same?
  How should we make hard decisions that might help or hurt other  people ?
  How do our actions affect others?

  Ideas about ethics  
When discussing ethics, the philosophy is generally separated into:
  thinking about  morality ,
  the involvement of  science , 
  the freedom of people to decide for themselves how to act within their own beliefs.

 Morality  is what someone thinks or feels is good or bad.
There are many different moralities, but they share some things.
For example most people think that murder (killing somebody) is wrong.(compare  Exodus  20:13)
Some philosophers have hope to find more things that moralities share.
They think that ethics should use the  scientific method  to study 
things that people think are good or bad. Their work can be used
to test the fairness of a situation, such as how people should treat
each other. An example of this kind of thinking is the  categorical imperative .
Many countries have laws based on this idea of fairness.

  What is ethics used for?  
Understanding ethics can help people decide what to do when they have choices. Many philosophers think that doing anything or making any choice is a part of ethics.

Ethics is part of other fields of study in many ways. Here are some ways:

  Ethics is part of the study of  religion . In religion, people often learn what is good or bad from what they believe about  God  (or gods). Some important ideas about what is good or bad have come from religion. See  Ten Commandments .

  Some theories of  economics  say ethics has to do with  money . Money is a big part of most people's lives. Thinking about morality can be important in economics. For example, there is a saying about ethics taken from the  Bible  that 'the love of money is the root of all kinds of  evil ' (1 Timothy).The philosophy of  Marxism  also says that a few people using money in the wrong way can hurt many other people. 

  Government policy can be affected by what  politics politicians  think is ethical. Politicians try to create  laws  that help everyone do what is right. Political debates happen when the people who make public policy do not agree about what is right.

  In work, thinking about ethics can help with hard questions. Work can be like both economics and politics. Workers have to make money and follow laws. But the best way to do both is not always easy to know. The study of this is called  business ethics 

  People like  Medical doctor doctors  and  nurse s have to make  wikt:hard hard  choices about how to  health care care  for people. Sometimes the person being cared for, their  family  or the doctor do not agree what is best for them. Also, choices have to be made if there is not enough money for all people to get the help they need. The study of this is called  medical ethics 

  Discussing ethics can also be a way to stop people fighting or starting a war. By talking about ethics, people hope to get what they want without being violent. This works when all people agree that peace is very important. But not everyone agrees about what is right or wrong. So, sometimes anger can make it hard to talk without fighting.

Along with  aesthetics  ethics forms part of  axiology , the philosophy of what people like.

 Related pages 
   Conflict of interest 
   Utilitarianism 
   The Republic , a book by  Plato  that says that people who have power should use ethics to make choices.
   The Prince , a book by  Niccolo Machiavelli  that says that people who have power should not use ethics to make choices.

 Category:Ethics  