Korea

copyedit for undefined date April 2016 
 no sources date April 2016 
 File:Locator map of Korea.svg thumb|250px|Location of Korea in East Asia 
 File:Korean peninsula at night.jpg thumb|The Korean peninsula at night contrasting the brightly lit  South Korea  and mostly dark  North Korea 

 Korea  is in northeast  Asia . It covers a  peninsula  called the  Korean Peninsula . Korea became a  country  (or  state ) in 918. In 1948, it split into two countries:  North Korea  and  South Korea . North and South Korea and their  ally allies  fought against each other in the  Korean War .

People have lived in Korea for about 15,000 years.  In the past, some of modern  Manchuria  and  Siberia  was governed by Korea.  Korea is known for its fine  silk . In the  7th century , the people of  China  sought after  gold -workers from Korea.  Europeans had little knowledge about Korea until the modern era.  

Korea is famous for its traditional food  kimchi . The Korean people usually eat sticky white rice. Traditionally, Koreans eat  seaweed  soup on their birthdays. People believe the soup is also good for  pregnant  women.

South Korea has over 48 million people, and North Korea has more than 23 million. South Korea's biggest city is  Seoul , the capital of South Korea. The city has more than 10 million people and the region of Seoul has more than 21 million people. North Korea's biggest city is  Pyongyang , the capital of North Korea. It has fewer than 4 million people.

Korean people speak  Korean language Korean . Many people in South Korea study  English language English  and other languages in school.

South Korea is an advanced country with large cities,  high-speed rail  trains, high-speed internet, and many  television  and radio networks. Many Korean television dramas are popular around the world. But there are still poor areas, even in South Korea. The Korean farmers are not rich and struggle to compete with cheap food from other countries.

  History  

 Gochosun  is the first state in Korean history. It was established in 2333 BCE. Its real name is Chosun, but it is called Gochosun to make it different from other Chosun in Korean history.  Go  is a Korean  prefix  meaning 'old'. The founder of Gochosun is said to be  Dangun . The Korean people believe that  Dangun  established the country on October 3rd, and still celebrate that day. In Korea October 3rd is a  national holiday , which is named Kaecheonjeol (The day heaven opened). It is said to be the day that Dangun's father whose name is Hwan-ung came from sky on October 3rd 2457 BCE. Gochosun was destroyed by the Chinese  Han Dynasty  in 108 BCE.

After Gojoseon had been destroyed there were many  confederation s in the  Korean Peninsula  and  Manchuria :  Mahan, Byeonhan, Jinhan, Buyeo, Dongye, Okjeo, Goguryeo , and so on. The ancient confederation countries later merged into three more powerful  kingdom s and an advanced confederation country.

  Three Kingdoms  
 Main Three Kingdoms of Korea 
Between  57 BC  and the year  668  there were three  kingdom s in the  Korean Peninsula  and  Manchuria . The names of the kingdoms were:  Silla ,  Goguryeo  and  Baekje . In the year  372 , the religion  Buddhism  came from China to Korea. Buddhism was very important in Korea.

In the year  660 , the kingdom of Silla invaded the kingdom of Baekje. In the year 668 the kingdom of Silla invaded the kingdom of Goguryeo. The people of Goguryeo ran away and made a new kingdom with the name  Barhae . After a little time, the kingdom of Balhae was invaded by Liao Dynasty.

When Silla was the only country, it had the name  Unified Silla . In the Silla kingdom  Buddhism  was very important.

 class wikitable  Year
  Event
   57 BCE 
  Silla was established. The first leader is  Hyeokgeose of Silla Hyeokgeose .
   37 BCE 
  Goguryeo was established as a  kingdom . The first leader is  King Dongmyeong of Goguryeo King Dongmyeong .
   18 BCE 
  Baekje was established. The first leader is  Onjo of Baekje Onjo . The age of  Three Kingdoms of Korea  began.
   1st century 
  Gaya was established by some states around Gimhae.
   562 562 CE 
  Gaya was destroyed by and merged into Silla.
   660 660 CE 
  Baekje was destroyed by  Tang Dynasty  and merged into Silla.
   668 668 CE 
  Goguryeo was destroyed by Silla-Tang Alliance. The age of  Three Kingdoms of Korea  was finished.
   935 935 CE 
  Silla was destroyed by and merged to Goryeo.
 

  The northern and southern kingdoms  
In the year 998, Balhae was founded by allies of Goguryeo. We call the time when united Silla and Balhae were existing together (698~926)  The northern and southern kingdoms period .

  Goryeo (Korea)  
In the year 918 the kingdom of  Goryeo  began. The name  Korea  comes from  Goryeo . The kingdom of Goryeo had power until the year  1392 .

The kingdom of Goryeo wrote the law in books, and had a big  government .  Buddhism  was very important in the kingdom of Goryeo. Bronze-type printing technology was invented in Goryeo Dynasty. This is known as the world's oldest bronze-type printing technology.

  Joseon  
In the year  1392  a man from the military of Korea went to China. His name was  Yi Seonggye . Yi's job was to attack China. But Yi returned without doing it. When Yi came back to Korea, he changed the kingdom. Yi became king.

The name of the kingdom was  Joseon . In the year  1394 , the people of Joseon moved the capital to  Seoul . The religion of Buddhism was not important. A new religion, Confucianism was important.  Confucianism  came from China.

In the year  1443  the king  Sejong the Great Sejong  ruled. He invented the Korean alphabet  Hangeul .

In the year  1592  and the year  1598  the people from  Japan  fought Korea. A man from the military made very strong ships, including the famous  turtle ship . The name of the man was  Yi Sun-sin . With the strong ships, the people of Korea won.

The people of Joseon were friends with the people of China.

Today, North Koreans use the name Joseon (officially Choson) to mean Korea.

  19th century  
In the  19th century  the people of Korea did not want to trade with other people. People called Korea  Hermit Kingdom .

The people of the  United States  wanted to trade with Korea. The people of Japan also wanted to trade with Korea. Before 1876, people failed when they tried to use force to trade with Korea. In the year  1876  the military of Japan fought Korea. Korea and Japan made a contract to trade.

In  1895  Japan won a war against China. This war was fought in the Korean peninsula. The name of the war was  Sino-Japanese War . The military of Japan killed the Queen of Korea in 1895. The last name of the Queen was  Min Fact date December 2008 . Korea's name changed to  Daehan Jeguk  (empire of Korea).

The people from Korea made friends with the people from  Russia . In  1905  Japan won a war against Russia. The name of the war was  Russo-Japanese War . In the year  1910 , the emperor of Japan made Korea a colony of Japan.

  Colony of Japan to today  
 main Korea under Japanese rule 
Korea was occupied by Japan from 1910 to  1945 .

When  World War II  started, the policy of the Japanese government changed. The government made the  religion  of Japan ( Shinto ) the religion of Korea.

In 1945 Japan lost World War II. The  United States  and  Soviet Union  made a contract. United States occupied the south of Korea and Soviet Union occupied the north of Korea.

The people of Korea wanted to be independent. The United States and the Soviet Union agreed the people of Korea would be free and independent. But soon the United States and Soviet Union were not friends and the  Cold War  started. United States and Soviet Union refused to settle a deal. In 1948 the people in the south made an independent country called South Korea. The United States helped them. In 1948 the people in the north also made a country. The Soviet Union helped North Korea.

In  1950  a war started in Korea. The name of the war was the  Korean War . The war ended in  1953 , but no  peace treaty  was signed. The border line between North and South was the same in the end as it was before the war. No land was lost or gained.

Now there are two countries:  North Korea  (also called the DPRK or Democratic People's Republic of Korea) and  South Korea  (also called the Republic of Korea).

  Other websites  
 Commonscat-inline 
   Cite web
  url   http://www.korea.net/index.do 
  title Korea.net : The official website of the Republic of Korea
  work korea.net
  accessdate 22 April 2010
 

 Category:Korea   
 Category:Divided regions