Apple

The  apple tree  ( Malus  domestica ) is a deciduous tree in the  Rosaceae rose family  best known for its sweet, pomaceous fruit, the  apple . It is cultivated worldwide as a fruit tree, and is the most widely grown species in the genus  Malus.  The tree originated in Central Asia, where its wild ancestor,  Malus sieversii , is still found today. Apples have been grown for thousands of years in Asia and Europe, and were brought to North America by European colonists. Apples have religious and mythological significance in many cultures, including Norse, Greek and European Christian traditions.

Apple trees are large if grown from seed, but small if grafted onto roots (rootstock). There are more than 7,500 known cultivars of apples, resulting in a range of desired characteristics. Different cultivars are bred for various tastes and uses, including cooking, eating raw and cider production. Apples are generally propagated by grafting, although wild apples grow readily from seed. Trees and fruit are prone to a number of fungal, bacterial and pest problems, which can be controlled by a number of organic and non-organic means. In 2010, the fruit's genome was sequenced as part of research on disease control and selective breeding in apple production.

Worldwide production of apples in 2013 was 80.8 million tonnes, with China accounting for 49% of the total. ref name faostat cite web url http://faostat3.fao.org/browse/Q/QC/E publisher  FAOSTAT, UN Food & Agriculture Organization, Statistics Division title Production/Crops, Apple, Area by World date 2013 accessdate 8 May 2016 ref 

  Botanical information  

The apple has a small, leaf-shedding tree that grows up to  convert 3 to 12 m  tall. The apple tree has a broad crown with thick  twig s.
The  leaf leaves  are  Phyllotaxis alternately arranged  simple  oval s. They are 5 to 12 centimeter centimetres  long and 3-6centimetres (1.2-2.4in) wide. It has a sharp top with a soft underside.  Blossom s come out in  spring  at the same time that the leaves begin to bud. The  flower s are white. They also have a slightly pink color. They are five  petal ed, and 2.5 to 3.5 centimetres (0.98 to 1.4 in) in  wikt:diameter diameter . The fruit  wikt:maturity matures  in  autumn . It is usually 5 to 9 centimetres (2.0 to 3.5 in) in diameter. There are five  carpel s arranged in a  star  in the middle of the fruit. Every carpel has one to three  seed s.
 Image:95apple.jpeg thumb|left|Wild  Malus sieversii  apple in  Kazakhstan 

  Wild ancestors  
The wild  ancestor  of apple trees is  Malus sieversii . They grow wild in the  mountain s of  Central Asia  in the north of  Kazakhstan ,  Kyrgyzstan ,  Tajikistan , and  Xinjiang ,  People's Republic of China China , ref name Architecture and size relations: an essay on the apple (Malus x domestica, Rosaceae) tree  and possibly also  Malus sylvestris . ref name Coart  Unlike  wikt:domestication domesticated  apples, their leaves become red in autumn. ref Archetti M. (2009).  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2684696/pdf/rspb20090355.pdf Evidence from the domestication of apple for the maintenance of autumn colours by coevolution.  Proc Biol Sci. 276(1667):2575-80. PMID 19369261 ref  They are being used recently to develop  Malus domestica  to grow in colder  wikt:climate climates . ref name app3 

 History 

The apple tree was possibly the earliest tree to be cultivated. ref name app6  Its fruits have become better over thousands of years. It is said that  Alexander the Great  discovered  wikt:small dwarf  apples in  Asia Minor  in 300  BC .  Asia  and  Europe  have used winter apples as an important food for thousands of years. From when  Europe ans arrived,  Argentina  and the  United States  have used apples as food as well. ref name app6 cite web
 url   http://www.vegparadise.com/highestperch39.html 
 title  An apple a day keeps the doctor away
 accessdate  27 January 2008
 publisher vegparadise.com
 ref  Apples were brought to  North America  in the 1600s. The first apple  orchard  on the North American continent was said to be near  Boston  in 1625. In the 1900s, costly fruit  industry industries , where the apple was a very important species, began developing. ref name app3 

  In culture  
  Paganism  
 Image:Carl Larsson Brita as Iduna.jpg thumb|"Brita as  Idunn Iduna " (1901) by Carl Larsson 

In  Norse mythology , the goddess  Idunn  gives apples to the gods in  Prose Edda  (written in the 13th century by  Snorri Sturluson ) that makes them young forever. English  wikt:scholar scholar  H. R. Ellis Davidson suggests that apples were related to  religion religious  practices in  Germanic paganism . It was from there, she claims, that  Norse paganism  developed. She points out that buckets of apples were discovered in the place of burial for the Oseberg  ship  in  Norway . She also remarks that fruit and  Nut (fruit) nuts  (Idunn having been described as changing into a nut in  Skaldskaparmal ) have been discovered in the early  grave s of the  Germanic peoples  in  England . They have also been discovered somewhere else on the continent of Europe. She suggests that this may have had a  symbol ic meaning. Nuts are still a symbol of  fertility  in Southwest England.

  Cooking  
Sometimes apples are eaten after they are  cooked . Often apples are eaten uncooked. Apples can also be made into  drink s.  Apple juice  and apple  cider  are apple drinks. 

The flesh of the fruit is firm with a taste anywhere from sour to sweet. Apples used for cooking are sour, and need to be cooked with sugar, while other apples are sweet, and do not need cooking. There are some seeds at the core, that can be removed with a  tool  that removes the core, or by carefully using a  knife .

The  scientific name  of the apple tree genus in the  Latin  language is  Malus . Most apples that people grow are of the  Malus domestica  species.

Most apples are good to eat  raw  (not cooked), and are also used in many kinds of  bake d foods, such as  apple pie . Apples are cooked until they are  wikt:soft soft  to make  apple sauce .

Apples are also made into the  drink s  apple juice  and  cider . Usually, cider contains a little  alcohol , about as much as  beer . The regions of  Brittany  in  France  and  Cornwall  in  England  are known for their apple ciders.

  Apple cultivars  
If one wants to grow a certain type of apple it is not possible to do this by planting a seed from the wanted type. The seed will have  DNA  from the apple that the seeds came from, but it will also  have DNA from the apple flower that  pollinate d the seeds, which may well be a different type. This means that the tree which would grow from planting would be a mixture of two. In order to grow a certain type of apple, a small twig, or 'scion', is cut from the tree that grows the type of apple desired, and then added on to a specially grown  stump  called a rootstock. The tree that grows will only create apples of the type needed.

There are more than 7,500 known  cultivar s of apples. ref name Elzebroek cite book last Elzebroek first A.T.G. coauthors Wind, K. title Guide to Cultivated Plants publisher CAB International location Wallingford date 2008 page 27 isbn 1845933567 url http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=YvU1XnUVxFQC&lpg=PT39&dq=apple%20cultivars%207%2C500&pg=PT39#v=onepage&q=&f=false ref  Different cultivars are available for  temperate  and  subtropical  climates. One large collection of over 2,100 ref Cite web
  url   http://www.fastltd.co.uk/NationalFruitCollection.html 
  title  Taking care of the National Fruit Collection at Brogdale, Faversham
  work fastltd.co.uk
  accessdate 29 April 2010
 ref  apple cultivars is at the National Fruit Collection in  England . Most of these cultivars are grown for eating fresh (dessert apples). However, some are grown simply for cooking or making  cider . Cider apples are usually too  wikt:tart tart  to eat immediately. However, they give cider a rich flavor that dessert apples cannot. ref name apples1 cite web
 url   http://casfs.ucsc.edu/publications/news%20and%20notes/Fall_06_N&N.pdf 
 title  Autumn Apple Musings
 accessdate  24 January 2008
 format  pdf
 pages  1-2
 author Sue Tarjan
 publisher News & Notes of the UCSC Farm & Garden, Center for Agroecology & Sustainable Food Systems
 date fall 2006
 ref 

Most popular apple cultivars are soft but  wikt:crisp crisp . Colorful skin, easy shipping, disease resistance, ' Red Delicious ' apple shape, and popular flavor are also needed. ref name England cite web
 url   http://www.plantpress.com/wildlife/o523-apple.php 
 title  Apple - Malus domestica
 accessdate  22 January 2008
 publisher Natural England
 ref  Modern apples are usually sweeter than older cultivars. This is because popular tastes in apples have become different. Most  North America ns and  Europe ans enjoy sweet apples. ref name World  Extremely sweet apples with hardly any acid taste are popular in  Asia ref name World cite web
 url   http://www.fas.usda.gov/htp2/circular/1998/98-03/applefea.html 
 title  World apple situation
 accessdate  24 January 2008
 ref  and India. ref name apples1 

  In the United Kingdom  
In the  United Kingdom  there are about 3000 different types of apples. The most common apple type grown in England is the 'Bramley seedling', which is a popular cooking apple.

Apple orchards are not as common as they were in the early 1900s, when apples were rarely brought in from other countries. Organizations such as  http://www.commonground.org.uk/ Common Ground  teach people about the importance of rare and local varieties of fruit. ' Apple Day ' is celebrated each  October 21  in many countries.

  In North America  
Many apples are grown in  temperate  parts of the  United States  and  Canada . In many areas where apple growing is important, people have huge celebrations:

   Annapolis Valley Apple Blossom Festival  - held five days every spring (May-June) in  Nova Scotia 
   Shenandoah Apple Blossom Festival  - held six days every spring in  Winchester, Virginia .
   Washington State Apple Blossom Festival  - held two weeks every spring (April-May) in  Wenatchee, Washington 

  Varieties of apples  
 File:Golden delicious apple.jpg right|thumb|A Golden Delicious apple. 
There are lots of different varieties of apples, including:

   Fuji (apple) 
   Gala 
   Golden Delicious  (sometimes called a Green Delicious Apple)
   Granny Smith 
   Jonagold 
   McIntosh 
   Pink Lady 
   Red Delicious 
   Winesap 
   Cox's Orange Pippin 

  Family  
Apples are in the group  Maloideae . It is a subfamily of the family  Rosaceae . They are in the same subfamily as  pear s. Its family is the family of rose like plants, and roses are in the family.

 References 
 reflist colwidth 30em refs 

 ref name Architecture and size relations: an essay on the apple (Malus x domestica, Rosaceae) tree cite journal last Lauri first Pierre-eric coauthors  Karen Maguylo, Catherine Trottier date 2006 title Architecture and size relations: an essay on the apple (Malus x domestica, Rosaceae) tree journal American Journal of Botany  publisher Botanical Society of America  issue 93 pages 357-368 ref 

 ref name Coart Coart E.  et al  2006. Chloroplast diversity in the genus  Malus : new insights into the relationship between the European wild apple ( Malus sylvestris  (L.) Mill.) and the domesticated apple ( Malus domestica  Borkh.).  Mol. Ecol.   15(8) : 2171-82. ref 

 ref name app3 cite book last Sauer first Jonathan D. title Historical geography of crop plants: a select roster publisher CRC Press date 1993 pages 109 isbn 0849389011 ref 

  Further reading  
  Potter D.  et al  2007. Phylogeny and classification of Rosaceae.  Plant Systematics and Evolution .  266  (1-2): 5-43.

  Other websites  
 sisterlinks 
   Cite web
  url   http://www.dmoz.org//Home/Cooking/Fruits_and_Vegetables/Apples// 
  title Open Directory - Home: Cooking: Fruits and Vegetables: Apples
  work dmoz.org
  accessdate 29 April 2010
 
   Cite web
  url   http://www.nationalfruitcollection.org.uk/ 
  title National Fruit Collection
  work nationalfruitcollection.org.uk
  accessdate 29 April 2010
 
   Cite web
  url   http://www.brogdalecollections.co.uk/ 
  title Brogdale Farm - home of the National Fruit Collection
  work brogdalecollections.co.uk
  accessdate 29 April 2010
 
   Cite web
  url   http://www.healthonlinezine.info/health-benefits-of-apples.html 
  title 15 Health Benefits of Apples
  work healthonlinezine.info
  accessdate 29 April 2010
 

 Fruits 

 Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Apples   
 Category:Rosaceae 
 de:Kulturapfel#Fruchte