River

File:River Thames - Isle of Dogs to Thurrock.jpg thumb|300px|The River  Thames  in London, England. People have lived along the banks of this river for thousands of years. 

A  river  is a  stream  of  water  that flows through a channel (or passage) in the surface of the ground. The passage where the river flows is called the river bed and the earth on each side is called a river bank. A river begins on high ground or in hills or mountains and flows down from the high ground to the lower ground, because of  gravity . A river begins as a small stream, and gets bigger the farther it flows. 

The water in a river is called  fresh water . It comes from rain or snow and it can usually be drunk safely, unless it has been  pollution polluted . The water in a  sea  cannot be drunk safely because it is  salt water . Both people and animals often live near rivers. They need water to survive and, for humans, rivers were once the only means of fast  transport .

  About rivers  
  The beginning of a river  
The start of a river is called the  source  or  head water . The part of the river that is near the source is called a 'young' river. ref name camilla cite book   last     first      title   Earth Science  publisher    Austin,  Texas : Holt, Rinehart and Winston  date   2001   isbn   0-03-055667-8 ref  A young river is often in a V-shaped river bed, and flows quickly downhill over stones, and around big rocks. Young rivers often have lots of small  waterfall s and  rapids . 

  The source of a river may be a  spring (water) spring , often on a  hill ,  mountain , glacier, or another high place. A spring is water that flows out from under the ground.
  The source of a river may be a lake where lots of water from small streams gathers when it rains or snows.
  A river may begin in mountains where there is snow. The melting snow runs together to form a small stream that runs down the mountain. As more little streams run in, the main stream gets bigger, until it forms a river.
  Some rivers flow from hills where there is no snow, but lots of rain.
  Some rivers only flow after there has been rain near the head water. 
 gallery  
Image:Arkansas_head_waters.jpg|The headwaters of the Arkansas River have rapids.
Image:Soca.jpg|The Soca River begins in the mountains of Slovenia. 
Image:Imm015.jpg|Waterfalls are most often found in a young river.
Image:Trephina Gorge 07.jpg|This river in Northern [[Australia]] only runs after heavy rain.
 gallery 

  The middle part of a river  
The middle part of a river is called a mature river. A mature river makes a riverbed that is U-shaped. It might be very deep and run fast. It sweeps over small rocks and boulders, and makes big turns around hills and mountains. It is much wider than a young river, but not as wide as an old river. To cross over a mature river, people use bridges. Many cities and towns are built on the banks of mature rivers. Many farms that keep animals such as  cattle dairy cows ,  horse s and  sheep  are along mature rivers because the animals can drink from the river every day. 
 gallery  
Image:Clearwater River valley (from Highway 63).JPG|Clearwater River in Alberta is a "mature river". 
Image:River Severn from Severn Valley Railway train 2004-12-31.jpg|The Severn River flowing through farmland.
Image:Bacharach rheinblick.jpg|The Rhine River valley has many towns. 
Image:Firenze-riflessi sull'arno2.jpg|The city of [[Florence]] was built beside the Arno River. 
 gallery 

  The last part of a river  
A river usually ends by flowing into an  ocean , a  lake  or a bigger river. The place where the river flows out into a bigger body of water is called the 'mouth' of the river. 

As a river flows towards its mouth, the countryside around the river often changes from hilly to flat. As it flows over the flat land the river becomes wider and slower. A wide slow river is called an 'old river'. An old river often floods across the land after there is lots of rain at the headwaters. An old river slowly builds up its banks on either side; the high banks are called  levee s. An old river often  meanders  (twists and turns), and sometimes, after a flood, it leaves lakes behind which are called ox-bows or  Billabong (lake) billabongs . Old rivers are the most useful type of river for growing  crop s.  Corn ,  rice ,  fruit ,  cotton ,  hay ,  tobacco  and  sugar  are some of the crops that are grown near old rivers. 

The shape of the mouth depends on the conditions of the sea where it flows. If there is a strong  tide  where the river meets the sea, the river forms an  estuary . An estuary is a wide, funnel-like mouth of the river. The fresh water of the river mixes slowly with the salt water, becoming  brackish  water - somewhat salty water. Many kinds of  fish ,  clam s,  mollusc s and other sealife live at estuaries. Many of the world's largest  city cities  and  harbour s are at estuaries.

Where a river flows out to the sea, it sometimes flows very slowly through sandy or muddy land, making lots of little islands as it flows. The main stream of the river gets broken into many parts that spread out into a triangle shape like the Greek letter  delta . When this happens, it is called the  river delta delta  of the river. Deltas are often places that are not good for towns or farms but are very good for birds and other wildlife and  fishing . Deltas are often made into  wildlife reserve s. Not all rivers have deltas. There are famous deltas on the  Nile River , the  Amazon River , the  Mekong River , the  Mississippi River  and the  Danube River . 

 gallery  
Image:Nowitna river.jpg|The Nowitna is an old river with meanders and ox-bow lakes. 
Image:Gangesdelta klein.jpg|The delta of the Ganges River in India
Image:Aerial view of Okavango.jpg|The grassy islands of the Okavango delta are the home of elephants, lions and [[flamingo]]s.
Image:LOC Brooklyn Bridge and East River 2 cropped.jpg|Cities are often near the mouth of a river. 
 gallery 

  Underground rivers  
Some rivers flow underground through  cave s. Underground rivers form in places where there are lots of cracks in the rocks above, so that in rainy weather, the water runs downs and collects in small underground streams. Sometimes the underground water trickles or gushes out of the ground to form a small  spring (water) spring  of water. In other places, where there are caves, the small underground streams run together to form a river. The river can sometimes run through deep wide underground caverns. While many underground rivers flow gently, some underground rivers flow fast and have  rapids , particularly after heavy rain. Many underground rivers flow out through a cave mouth to become an ordinary river.

 gallery  
File:Katafygi Vatsinidi 1.jpg|Underground water flowing out of the Katafygi Vatsinidi Caves, [[Peloponnese]], [[Greece]] 
File:Vitarelles passage noel.jpg|Exploring the Ouysse River which flows from the Vitarelles Cave, [[France]]    
File:Kyzyl-Koba.jpg|Rapids on the Kyzyl-Koba underground river in [[Crimea]] 
File:Mammoth Cave River Styx.png|The River Styx runs out of the Mammoth Cave in [[Kentucky]], US
 gallery 

  Using rivers  
The water in rivers is "fresh water" that has come from rain, snow and from underground streams. It can usually be drunk safely by people unless it is too dirty because of mud or human  pollution . People and animals need fresh water to drink, so they often live by the side of a river. 

  Rivers give water for drinking, bathing and washing clothes.
  Rivers give water for  cattle  and other animals to drink and for people to grow plants.
  Rivers give  Product (consumer goods) products  that are useful to people such as fish for food,  clay  for bricks and  Reed (plant) reeds  to make the roofs of houses.
  Rivers can be used for transporting people, crops and other goods by boat.
  Rivers can be used to give power to turn machinery such as water  watermill mills .
  Rivers give water for factories that make cloth, steel and many other products.
  Rivers sometimes have dams to hold the water for people to drink, or to make electricity.
  Rivers can be used for  leisure  and  sport s such as swimming, boating, fishing and just walking by the river.
  Rivers often have beautiful scenery. Many painters, story-tellers and poets have painted or written about rivers.
  Rivers are sometimes turned into canals.
  Water for living  
 gallery  
Image:Chitwan Elephants bathing.jpg|Two elephants have been taken to a river to drink and take a bath.
Image:CanThoFloatingMarket.jpg|A floating market on the Mekong River 
Image:Pirogue 010.jpg|Transport on the Niger River 
Image:Mopti Fishing Boats.jpg|Fishing boats on the Bani River in Mali 
 gallery 

  Water for industry  
 gallery 
Image:Rising-sun-indiana-ohio-river--from-above.jpg|The Ohio River gives water for food crops. 
Image:Klyazma river wool weaving Factory in Noginsk.jpg|A wool weaving factory on the Klyazma River.
Image:North River Port.JPG|[[Cargo]] containers waiting for transport from North River Port, Moscow.
Image:0 Nisramont - Barrage (1).JPG|Dams are built across rivers to store water and make electric power.
 gallery 

  Water for fun  
 gallery 
Image:North Platte River Northgate Canyon Canoers.jpg|Canoeing is a popular river sport. 
Image:DovedaleRaised platform and tropical river.jpg|Walking by the river, Dovedale, England
Image:Stintangler an der Elbe.jpg|Competition fishing in the Elbe River 
Image:Green Lake Crew Junior Men's 8 @ 2007 Henley Royal Regatta.jpg|Racing in a "regatta" at Henley, England
 gallery 

  Rivers in art, literature and music  
   Mark Twain ,  The Adventures of Tom Sawyer , (novel)
   Kenneth Grahame ,  The Wind in the Willows , (novel)

  Rivers in photography  
 gallery perrow 4  
Image:Mekong dawn.jpg|The [[Mekong]] River at [[dawn]] 
Image:Polska Rezerwat Wysokie Bagno Narewka 010.jpg|Narewka River runs through a nature reserve in [[Poland]].
Image:Forest reflections.JPG|A forest reflected in a river in [[Sweden]] 
Image:Homeward bound.jpg|Evening on the Brahmaputra River, [[India]] 
Image:Sunset in Coquitlam.jpg|Sunset in Coquitlam, [[Canada]]
Image:Hong Kong riverside.jpg|[[Hong Kong]] river reflections 
Image:A full moon reflecting off the river - NOAA.jpg|"Moon River" is a song by Johnny Mercer and Henry Mancini.
Image:Taieri River - Otago.jpg|Taieri River, [[Otago]]

 gallery 

  Important rivers  

  the  Amazon River  in  South America  is a very wide tropical river flowing through the Amazon  Jungle  and into the  Atlantic Ocean  through a large delta. Many types of fish live in it. It is the largest river in the world.
  the  Nile River  in  Africa . For thousands of years this river has provided the people of  Egypt  with water to help their food grow.  Cairo , the biggest  city  in  Egypt  and  Africa , is built near the Nile's  river delta delta  on the  Mediterranean Sea . It is the longest river in the world.
  the  Mississippi River  in the  United States . Many crops are grown along the sides of the Mississippi. It was also used for transport. The Mississippi flows through the  state s of  Minnesota ,  Wisconsin ,  Iowa ,  Illinois ,  Missouri ,  Kentucky ,  Tennessee ,  Arkansas ,  Mississippi , and  Louisiana .
  the  Yangtze River , a very large river in China, the third longest in the world, and the longest in Asia
  the  Rhine River 
  the Rivers  Tigris  and  Euphrates 
  the  Ganges River 
  the  Mekong River 
  the  Danube River Danube 
  the  Volga River 
  the  St. Lawrence River 
  the  Murray River  in  Australia , 1609 miles in length.
  the  Congo River 
  the  Niger River 
  the  River Thames 
  the  Tiber River  

  River Terminology  
 A  meander  is a bend or curve in a river.
 The  mouth  of a river is where the river enters the sea, ocean or lake.
 An  oxbow  lake is located at the side of a river and is curved like a "meander"
 A  braided river  is a usually slow-moving river which splits up and joins together repeatedly.

  Other types of rivers  
  A  submarine river  is a stream of water that flows along under the surface of an  ocean . One of them, named the  Cromwell current , was found in  1952 . ("Sub marine" comes from  Latin language Latin  and means "under sea".) 
  A  subterranean river  is a river which flows under the surface of the  earth . One of them was found in  August   1958  under the  Nile River . (The term "sub terranean" also comes from Latin and means "under ground".)

 Related pages 
   Water 
   Valley 
   Lake 
   Flood 
   Drought 
   Erosion 

  References  
 reflist   Category:Basic English 850 words 
 Category:Rivers   
 Category:Biomes